

















































































  





  



















































  




































  
































































































  





















ACT I. Scene I.
      A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-  
  A Gentleman, courtier.
  A Priest.
ACT III. Scene I.
ACT IV. Scene I.
  A Norwegian Captain.
ACT V. Scene I.
    A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
      About her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
      About the world have times twelve thirties been,
    A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
    A brother's murther! Pray can I not,
    Absent thee from felicity awhile,
    Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
    According to the phrase or the addition
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
    A combination and a form indeed
    A couch for luxury and damned incest.
    A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Act II. Scene I.
    Addicted so and so'; and there put on him
    A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
    Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me.                      Exit.  
    A double blessing is a double grace;
    Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
    A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
    A face without a heart,'
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    Affront Ophelia.  
                   A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
    After the thing it loves.
    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!
    A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
              Alack, and fie for shame!
    Against the which a moiety competent
    A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
    Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
    Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
    A little month, or ere those shoes were old
    Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
  All. Gentlemen!
  All. Lights, lights, lights!
  All. Our duty to your honour.  
  All. No, let's come in!
  All. Treason! treason!
  All. We will, we will!
         All flaxen was his poll.
    All given to mine ear.
    All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
              All in the morning bedtime,
    All my smooth body.
    And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught,-
    All may be well.                                  He kneels.
    Among a mineral of metals base,
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
    A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
    A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
      An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
  Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
            And I a maid at your window,
    And I am sick at heart.
    And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.
    And I beseech you instantly to visit
    And I do think- or else this brain of mine
    And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
    And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
    And I the matter will reword; which madness
    And I with them the third night kept the watch;
    And You must put me in your heart for friend,
    And all we mourn for.  
    And after we will both our judgments join
    And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.'
    And am most sensibly in grief for it,
      And as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
    And a most instant tetter bark'd about,  
    And, as I think, they have already order
    And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
    And, as the world were now but to begin,
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
    And at our more consider'd time we'll read,  
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
    And bear it to the chapel.
    And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
    And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
    And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
      And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
    And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
    And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
    And carriage of the article design'd,
    And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
    And could of men distinguish, her election
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
    And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
    And break your own neck down.
    And call it accident.
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
    And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
    And can say nothing! No, not for a king,
    And call the noblest to the audience.
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds
    And do such bitter business as the day
    And do't the speedier that you may direct me
    And draw you into madness? Think of it.
    And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed  
    And drive his purpose on to these delights.
              And dupp'd the chamber door,
    And each particular hair to stand an end
    And enterprises of great pith and moment
    And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
    And even the like precurse of fierce events,
    And either [master] the devil, or throw him out
    And ever three parts coward,- I do not know
    And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
    And foreign mart for implements of war;
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
    And for his death no wind
    And for my means, I'll husband them so well
    And for my soul, what can it do to that,
    And for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
    And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
    And for your rapier most especially,
    And from her fair and unpolluted flesh  
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    And gem of all the nation.
    And gave you such a masterly report
    And gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
    And hath abatements and delays as many  
    And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
    And he not from his reason fall'n thereon
    And hit the woundless air.- O, come away!
    And hears it roar beneath.
      And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
    And he to England shall along with you.
         And hath shipped me intil the land,
    And he beseech'd me to entreat your Majesties
    And his commission to employ those soldiers,
           And his sandal shoon.
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
    And hurt my brother.
    And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'
    And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
         And in his grave rain'd many a tear.
    And in part him.' Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
    And in the cup an union shall he throw
    And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
    And in the porches of my ears did pour
    And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
    And in this brainish apprehension kills
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    And let us once again assail your ears,
    And let him know so.
    And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
    And keep you in the rear of your affection,  
    And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
    And leads the will to desperate undertakings
    And lay your hands again upon my sword.
    And let me speak to the yet unknowing world
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    And let them know both what we mean to do
    And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
    And, like a man to double business bound,
      And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    And live the purer with the other half,
    And lose the name of action.- Soft you now!
    And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
    And makes us rather bear those ills we have
    And makes each petty artire in this body
    And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
    And many such-like as's of great charge,
    And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
    And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
    And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame  
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
      And never come mischance between us twain!
    And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
    And my imaginations are as foul
      And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
    And not have strew'd thy grave.
    And nothing is at a like goodness still;
    And not where I had aim'd them.
    And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
    And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
    And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
    And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b' wi', you.
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    And our affairs from England come too late.  
    And our vain blows malicious mockery.
    And pious action we do sugar o'er  
    And pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
    And prey on garbage.
      And passion in the gods.'
    And prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,
    And prologue to the omen coming on,
    And put it in his pocket!  
    And reason panders will.
    And recks not his own rede.
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
    And set a double varnish on the fame
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
    And shall I couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
    And since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And so am I reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
    And so, without more circumstance at all,
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
    And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
    And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
    And sure I am two men there are not living
    And tell you what I know.
    And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
    And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
    And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine-  
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
    And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
    And that his soul may be as damn'd and black
    And that in way of caution- I must tell you
    And that our drift look through our bad performance.
    And that shall lend a kind of easiness
    And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
    And that your Grace hath screen'd and stood between
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    And there assume some other, horrible form
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
    And there I see such black and grained spots
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    And therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
    And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet
    And these few precepts in thy memory
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
    And they can well on horseback; but this gallant  
      And thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
    And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
    And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
      And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
    And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
    And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
    And thus a while the fit will work on him.
         And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
    And thus the native hue of resolution
    And to the last bended their light on me.
    And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
    And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    And to the manner born, it is a custom
    And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
    And vanish'd from our sight.
    And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
    And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
    And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
    And we beseech you, bend you to remain
           And we cast away moan.
    And we did think it writ down in our duty
    And we shall jointly labour with your soul
    And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
    And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
    And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
    And what's untimely done. [So haply slander-]
    And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
    And when you are desirous to be blest,
    And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
    And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
      And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
    And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
         And will he not come again?
         And will he not come again?
    And will not let belief take hold of him
    And will not wrong it.
    And with a larger tether may he walk
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
    And with a look so piteous in purport
    And with a sudden vigour it doth posset
    And with his head over his shoulder turn'd
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    And with no less nobility of love
    And with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
    And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
    And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
    And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
    And (would it were not so!) you are my mother.
    An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
    And you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
    And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
    And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd
    And with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
    And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
    Are burnt and purg'd away. But that I am forbid  
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Answer, and think upon this business.
         A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
    A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
    Anon, as patient as the female dove
    An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
              An thou hadst not come to my bed.'
    Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
                                                 A noise within.
                              A noise within: 'Let her come in.'
      Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
    An understanding simple and unschool'd;
    Are joyfully return'd.
    Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
    Are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
A room in the Castle.
    Are most select and generous, chief in that.
      Aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
    Art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.  
    As England was his faithful tributary,
    As I do thee. Something too much of this I
    (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
    (As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that,
    As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'
    As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
    A sable silver'd.
    As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
           'As by lot, God wot,'
    A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
    As are companions noted and most known
    As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
    As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
    A scullion!  
    As day does to your eye.
    As did that one; and that, in my regard,
      A second time I kill my husband dead
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means
    A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
    As e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
    As false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
    As fits a king's remembrance.
    As from the body of contraction plucks  
    As had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd
    As harbingers preceding still the fates
    As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
    As he in his particular act and place
    As he is very potent with such spirits,
    As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
    As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.
      As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
    (As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
    [Aside] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
           As if I had never been such.
    As if it some impartment did desire
    As if he had been loosed out of hell
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
    As if increase of appetite had grown
    As infinite as man may undergo-  
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,
    A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
    As it behooves my daughter and your honour.
    As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
    As it doth well appear unto our state,
    As it hath us'd to do- that I have found  
    As it is common for the younger sort
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.  
    As level as the cannon to his blank,
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,
    As may dishonour him- take heed of that;
      As low as to the fiends!
    As make your bouts more violent to that end-
    As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
    As meditation or the thoughts of love,
    A station like the herald Mercury
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
    As one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
    As oft as any passion under heaven
    As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
    Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
    As of a father; for let the world take note
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
    As therein are set down.
    As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
    As to expend your time with us awhile
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
    As to peace-parted souls.
    As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
    As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;
    A sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
    As will not leave their tinct.
    As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
    As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
               A table and flagons of wine on it.  
    At gaming, swearing, or about some act
            At his head a grass-green turf,
              At his heels a stone.
    A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
    At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.        [Writes.]
                                                    Attendants].
              Attendants with foils and gauntlets.
    Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
    A very noble youth. Mark.
           A very, very- pajock.
    A violet in the youth of primy nature,
    Away! for everything is seal'd and done
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    A villain kills my father; and for that,
    A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."
    Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
         Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
    Be all my sins rememb'red.
    Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
    Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
    Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
    Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come.
    Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
    Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
    Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
    Been struck so to the soul that presently
    Before You visit him, to make inquire
    Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
    Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
    Before my daughter told me), what might you,
    Behind the arras I'll convey myself
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    Being a thing immortal as itself?  
    Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
    Believe so much in him, that he is young,
  Ber. Have you had quiet guard?
  Ber. He.
  Ber. How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.
  Ber. I have seen nothing.
    Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
  Ber. Well, good night.
  Bernardo, officer.
  Ber. See, it stalks away!
  Ber. Sit down awhile,
    Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
  Ber. 'Tis here!
  Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
  Ber. Who's there.?
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
  Ber. Last night of all,
  Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
    Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
  Ber. It would be spoke to.
  Ber. Say-
  Ber. In the same figure, like the King that's dead.  
    Between the pass and fell incensed points
  Ber. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
  Ber. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.
  Ber. Long live the King!
    Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
  Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
    Be you and I behind an arras then.
    Be you content to lend your patience to us,
         Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
    Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?  
  Both [Mar. and Ber.] We do, my lord.
  Both. Arm'd, my lord.
  Both. Longer, longer.
  Both. My lord, from head to foot.
  Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.  
  Both. My lord, we will not.
  Both. We'll wait upon you.  
  Both. We will, my lord.                       Exeunt they two.
    Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!
  Both. We will haste us.
    Both to my God and to my gracious king;
      Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
    Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
      Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
    Break we our watch up; and by my advice  
    Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
    Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
         But age with his stealing steps
    But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
    But I will delve one yard below their mines
    Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
    But I have that within which passeth show-
    But answer made it none. Yet once methought
    But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
    Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
    But I do prophesy th' election lights  
      But, as we often see, against some storm,
    But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
    But better look'd into, he truly found
    But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!
    But come!
      But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
    But do not go with it!
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practice  
    But farewell it, for I will use no art.  
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
      But fill unshaken when they mellow be.
    But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
    But from what cause he will by no means speak.
    But he's an arrant knave.
    But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
    But if't be he I mean, he's very wild
      But if the gods themselves did see her then,
    But if you hold it fit, after the play
    But in battalions! First, her father slain;
    But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
    But in our circumstance and course of thought,
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
    But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
    But it reserv'd some quantity of choice
    But let me hear from you.
    But let that go.
    But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;
    But keep a farm and carters.
    But let this same be presently perform'd,
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
    But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    But mere implorators of unholy suits,  
    But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
            But never doubt I love.
    But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-
    But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
      But, orderly to end where I begun,  
    But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their
    But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
    But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
    But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
    But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
    But that this folly douts it.                          Exit.
    But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
    But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-
    But that the dread of something after death-
    But this eternal blazon must not be
    But that I know love is begun by time,
    But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
    But soft! methinks I scent the morning air.
    But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
      But what we do determine oft we break.
    But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
    But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
      But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword  
    But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    But to recover of us, by strong hand
    But truly I do fear it.
    But what is your affair in Elsinore?
    But wilt thou bear me how I did proceed?
    But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
    But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
    But to my mind, though I am native here  
      But woe is me! you are so sick of late,
    But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother
    But you'll be secret?
    But you must know, your father lost a father;
    But you shall hear. Thus:
    Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
              By Cock, they are to blame.
    By desperate appliance are reliev'd,
    By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!-
    By heaven, it is as proper to our age
    By indirections find directions out.
    By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    By laboursome petition, and at last
    By letters congruing to that effect,
    By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?
    By this encompassment and drift of question
    By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
         By his cockle bat and' staff
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
    Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murther'?
    Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
    Can you advise me?
    Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
  Capt. Against some part of Poland.  
  Capt. God b' wi' you, sir.                             [Exit.]
  Capt. I will do't, my lord.
  Capt. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
  Capt. They are of Norway, sir.
  Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
  Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
  Claudius, King of Denmark.
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,  
  Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'A pour'd a flagon of
    Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
  Clown. 'A was the first that ever bore arms.
  Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?
  Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
  Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
  Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
  Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
  Clown. E'en that.
  Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
  Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
  Clown. For no man, sir.
  Clown. For none neither.
  Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
  Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own
  Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
  Clown. Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she wilfully
  Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
  Clown. Mine, sir.
  Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
  Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that our
  Clown. (Sings)
  Clown. 'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
  Clown. To't.
  Clown. 'Twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
  Clown. Very strangely, they say.
  Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture?
  Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
  Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'A shall recover his wits there;
  Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy  
  Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
  Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
  Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
  Clown. (sings)
                       [Clown digs and] sings.
    Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
    Collected from all simples that have virtue
                  Colours, and Attendants.
    Come.
    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    Come short of what he did.
  Cor., Volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
  Cornelius, courtier.
    Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
    Convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
    Contagious blastments are most imminent.
    Consent to swear.
    Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
      Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
    Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
    Come, some music!
    Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood
    Comes armed through our watch, so like the King
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,  
    Conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
    Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
    Come hither, gentlemen,
    Come. (They play.) Another hit. What say you?
    Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    Couch we awhile, and mark.
    Could force his soul so to his own conceit
    Could not so mope.
    Could not (with all their quantity of love)
    Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
    Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
    Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
    Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
    Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
    Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
    Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night.
    Denmark?- What, my young lady and mistress? By'r Lady, your
    Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
    Depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
    Devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
    Devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
      Did nothing.
    Did not together pluck such envy from him
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;  
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
    Dies in his own too-much. That we would do,
    Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw  
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
      Directly seasons him his enemy.
      Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
    Divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
    Do I impart toward you. For your intent  
    Does by their own insinuation grow.
    Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
    Do not as some ungracious pastors do,
    Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
    Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
    Doth all the noble substance often dout To his own scandal.
    Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murther of
    Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
            Doubt that the sun doth move;
          'Doubt thou the stars are fire;
          Doubt truth to be a liar;
    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
    Drabbing. You may go so far.
    Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
Dramatis Personae
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
      Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A hall in the Castle.
    Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
    Each toy seems Prologue to some great amiss.
Elsinore. A churchyard.
    Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
    Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
               [Drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].
    Drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
    Elsinore.
Elsinore. A passage in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
                         Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
    Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
                         Enter Hamlet.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.
                          Enter Hamlet.
Elsinore. The platform before the Castle.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.
Elsinore. hall in the Castle.
Elsinore. The Castle. Another part of the fortifications.
  English Ambassadors.
                           Enter Hamlet.
    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,
                        Enter Ghost.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
                      Enter Ghost again.
        Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern [with Attendants].
       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.
                 Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
                      Enter Horatio.
                 Enter Hamlet, reading on a book.
          Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
                    Enter Horatio and Marcellus.  
                   Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio with an Attendant.
                    Enter King.
Enter King.
    Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Lords.
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
Enter King and Laertes.
                   Enter King and Polonius.
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Enter Laertes and Ophelia.
                    Enter Laertes with others.
                         Enter Lucianus.
                       Enter Ophelia.
                            Enter Polonius.
                        Enter Polonius.
                      Enter Ophelia.  
                         Enter Polonius.
                   Enter Polonius.
                 Enter Ophelia distracted.
                       Enter Polonius.  
              Enter Polonius, Voltemand, and Cornelius.
            Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.
                    Enter Rosencrantz.
                           Enter Queen.
Enter Queen and Polonius.
                      Enter Prologue.
               Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                    Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
             Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                            Enter a Lord.
                     Enter a Messenger.
                          Enter Sailors.
                 Enter a Messenger with letters.
    Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing
                Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.
    Enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], King,
                     Enter four or five Players.
              Enter [two Players as] King and Queen.  
                     Enter the Players with recorders.  
Enter two Clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].
Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down
                 Enter young Osric, a courtier.
    Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
    Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
    Even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
    Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
    Even with the very comment of thy soul
                                                          Exeunt
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
    Excitements of my reason and my blood,
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
    Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
                                            [Exeunt Attendants.]
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern]
                                      Exeunt King and Polonius].
                 Exeunt Polonius and Players [except the First].
                                               Exeunt Gentlemen.
                          [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
                                        Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.
                            [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
                       Exeunt King and Queen, [with Attendants].
                          Exeunt [Rosencrantz and Guildenstern].
                                                 Exeunt Players.
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                 Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, [with some
                                        [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]  
                                        Exeunt [all but Hamlet].
                                 Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius.
                                        [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]
                              Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio.
                                   Exeunt [all but the Captain].
            Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
                                               [Exit Attendant.]
                                            [Exit First Player.]
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
                                                     Exit Ghost.
                                                     Exit Ghost.
                                                 [Exit Horatio.]  
                                                   Exit Horatio.
                                                     Exit Ghost.
                                                    [Exit Lord.]
                                                 Exit Messenger.
                                                [Exit Polonius.]
                                                Exit [Polonius].
                                                Exit [Polonius].  
                  [Exit the Queen. Then] Exit Hamlet, tugging in
    Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
    Extorted treasure in the womb of earth
    Exposing what is mortal and unsure
                                                   [Exit Queen.]
                                            [Exit Second Clown.]  
                                                  Exit Reynaldo.
    Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
    Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
    Farewell.
    Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
    Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
    Farewell, dear mother.
    Fare you well, my dove!
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard
    Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,
Flourish. [Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, cum aliis.
                                Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet.
                     Flourish for the Players.
    Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
    Follow my mother.                                 King dies.
    For England.
  For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
  For. Go softly on.
    For Hecuba!
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,  
    For good Polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
           For and a shrouding sheet;
    For by the image of my cause I see
    For art and exercise in your defence,
    For every man hath business and desire,
    Fordo it own life. 'Twas of some estate.
    For he himself is subject to his birth.
    For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
    For he was likely, had he been put on,
      For husband shalt thou-
    For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
    For in the fatness of these pursy times
    For my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
    For nature crescent does not grow alone
         For if the King like not the comedy,
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
    For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
    For it is as the air, invulnerable,
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
    For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
    For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
              For such a guest is meet.
    For out o' doors he went without their help
         For some must watch, while some must sleep:
    (For so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
           For such a guest is meet.
  Fort. Let four captains
  Fort. Where is this sight?
  Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
    For that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence
  Fort. Let us haste to hear it,  
    Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
    For the demand of our neglected tribute.
    Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
  Fortinbras, Prince of Norway.  
    For they are actions that a man might play;
    For this effect defective comes by cause.
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
         For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
      For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
    For, though I am not splenitive and rash,
    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
    For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
    (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
    For we will fetters put upon this fear,
  Fran. Bernardo?
    For what we know must be, and is as common
    For your desire to know what is between us,
    For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
    For what advancement may I hope from thee,  
    For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
  Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
      For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
      For women's fear and love holds quantity,
  Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
  Fran. Give you good night.
  Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
  Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
  Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.
  Fran. Not a mouse stirring.
  Francisco, a soldier
    Free me so far in your most generous thoughts  
    Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
           From another one?
    From fashion of himself. What think you on't?
    From that particular fault. The dram of e'il
    From me, whose love was of that dignity
    From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,
      'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
  Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.
    From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
  Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
  Gentlemen. (within) Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
    Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
  Getrude, Queen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.
    Get you a place.
  Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
  Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
  Ghost. Mark me.
  Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
  Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
  Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
  Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
  Ghost. I find thee apt;
  Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
  Ghost. My hour is almost come,
                                                [Ghost beckons.]  
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
  Ghost. Swear.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
  Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
                                           Ghost beckons Hamlet.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear by his sword.
                 Ghost cries under the stage.
  Ghost of Hamlet's Father.
    Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
    Give him the cup.
    Give it an understanding but no tongue.
    Give me one poor request.
    Give me my father!
    Give, me superfluous death.                  A noise within.
    Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't.
    Given private time to you, and you yourself
                                                [Gives a paper.]
    Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee
    Give us the foils. Come on.
    Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
    Giving to you no further personal power
    Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
    Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.-
    God bless you, sir!
    Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
    Give you good night.                                   Exit.
    Good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
         God 'a'mercy on his soul!
    Gonzago'?
    God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
    Good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
    Good night, mother.
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
    Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
    Go on. I'll follow thee.
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
           Go to thy deathbed;
    Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
                                            [Grapples with him].
    Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
    Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
      Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
    Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire,
    Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,  
  Guil. A thing, my lord?
  Guil. But we both obey,
  Guil. Believe me, I cannot.
  Guil. But these cannot I command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
  Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
  Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.
  Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
  Guil. Faith, her privates we.
  Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
  Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices
  Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
  Guil. My lord, I cannot.
  Guil. In what, my dear lord?
  Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.  
  Guil. My honour'd lord!
  Guil. My lord, we were sent for.
  Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
  Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
  Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
  Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
  Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
  Guil. Prison, my lord?  
  Guil. The King, sir-
  Guil. The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
  Guil. There are the players.
  Guil. We will ourselves provide.
  Guil. What, my lord?
  Guil. What should we say, my lord?
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
  Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
  Guildenstern, courtier.
                                                          HAMLET.'
                                                     'HAMLET.'
    Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
    Had he the motive and the cue for passion
    Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
    Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
    Had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,
    Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
  Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
    Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
  Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.
  Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
  Ham. A king of shreds and patches!-
  Ham. Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
  Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
  Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
  Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
  Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
  Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
  Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
  Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
  Ham. An earnest conjuration from the King,
  Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
  Ham. Are you fair?
  Ham. Arm'd, say you?
  Ham. As th'art a man,
  Ham. As woman's love.
  Ham. At supper.
  Ham.   A whole one I!
  Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
  Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
  Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
  Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?
  Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
  Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to
  Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
  Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,  
  Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye!
  Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
  Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
  Ham. Between who?
  Ham. 'By-and-by' is easily said.- Leave me, friends.
  Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
  Ham. Buzz, buzz!
  Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,
  Ham. Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally.
  Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
  Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you;
  Ham. But where was this?
  Ham. Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonius.] Will you two
  Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge I
  Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.
  Ham. Come on, sir.
  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
  Ham. Did you not speak to it?
  Ham. Denmark's a prison.
  Ham. Dost thou think Alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
  Ham. Do not believe it.
  Ham. Do the boys carry it away?  
  Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
  Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
  Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
  Ham. Do you think I meant country matters?
  Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
  Ham. Ecstasy?
  Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
  Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
  Ham. From top to toe?
  Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god  
  Ham. For God's love let me hear!
  Ham. For England?
  Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
  Ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
  Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
  Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
  Ham. Good.  
  Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
  Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
  Ham. Good madam!
  Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?
  Ham. Hark you, Guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!
  Ham. Hear you, sir!
  Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
  Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
  Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
  Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,
  Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's Gonzago.  
  Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
  Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
  Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall
  Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
  Ham. He will stay till you come.
  Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
  Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
  Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
  Ham. Hold off your hands!
  Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
  Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
  Ham. How came he mad?
  Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
  Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
  Ham. How does the Queen?
  Ham. How if I answer no?
  Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
  Ham. How long is that since?
  Ham. How is it with you, lady?
  Ham. How purpos'd, sir, I pray you?
  Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
  Ham. How strangely?
  Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly I
  Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
  Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure.
  Ham. I am glad to see you well.
  Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
  Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.
  Ham. I am very glad to see you.- [To Bernardo] Good even, sir.-  
  Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see
  Ham. I beseech you remember.
  Ham. I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in
  Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
  Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into France I have been in
  Ham. I do beseech you.
  Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
  Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
  Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.
  Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.  
  Ham. If she should break it now!
  Ham. I lov'd Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
  Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
  Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath
  Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
  Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?
  Ham. I must to England; you know that?
  Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio] Dost know this
  Ham. I embrace it freely,
  Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
  Ham. I'll be your foil, Laertes. In mine ignorance
  Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
  Ham. In happy time.
  Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
  Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio.
  Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England!
  Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
  Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
  Ham. I will.
  Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
  Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
  Ham. It will not speak. Then will I follow it.
  Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard.- Prithee say on.
  Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
  Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
  Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a
  Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
  Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
  Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.
  Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
  Ham. Is't possible?
  Ham. I pray you.
  Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
  Ham. It waves me still.
  Ham. Into my grave?
  Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.-
  Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
  Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
  Ham. I will watch to-night.
  Ham. I would I had been there.
  Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
  Ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
  Ham. Judgment!
  Ham. Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
  Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
  Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skull.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,  
  Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
  Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
  Ham. Madam, how like you this play?
  Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
  Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.  
  Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
  Ham. My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in
  Ham. My fate cries out
  Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
  Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
  Ham. Murther?
  Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
  Ham. Nay, I know not.
  Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
  Ham. Nay, but swear't.
  Ham. Nay, but to live
  Ham. Nay, that follows not.
  Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter;
  Ham. Nay come! again!                         The Queen falls.  
  Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.
  Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.
  Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
  Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
  Ham. No, by this bad.  
  Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
  Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
  Ham. No, nor mine now. [To Polonius] My lord, you play'd once
  Ham. No, not I!
  Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
  Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
  Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
  Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
  Ham. Nothing.
  Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
  Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
  Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain
  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
  Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Ham. O God!
  Ham. No, you will reveal it.
  Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
  Ham. O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
  Ham. O, I die, Horatio!
  Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
  Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
  Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.
  Ham. Of him, sir.
  Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
  Ham. O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
  Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
  Ham. O my prophetic soul!
  Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
  Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
  Ham. One.
  Ham. Or like a whale.
  Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!
  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
  Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
  Ham. O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd.
  Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
  Ham. Pale or red?
  Ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
  Ham. Saw? who?
  Ham. Safely stow'd.
  Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'
  Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.
  Ham. She well instructs me.
  Ham. Sir, a whole history.
  Ham. Sir, I cannot.
  Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I  
  Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
  Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
  Ham. Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with you.
  Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
  Ham. So be it!
  Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
  Ham. So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
  Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.
  Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,
  Ham. Such an act
  Ham. 'Swounds, show me what thou't do.
  Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
  Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
  Ham. That is Laertes,
  Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
  Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
  Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
  Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.
  Ham. The King doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
  Ham. The King my father?
  Ham. 'The Mousetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
  Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
  Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.
  Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
  Ham. 'The mobled queen'?
  Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man.
  Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd
  Ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
  Ham. Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the
  Ham. Then saw you not his face?
  Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me
  Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
  Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
  Ham. The point envenom'd too?
  Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
  Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
  Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark
  Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.  
  Ham. These tedious old fools!
  Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I  
  Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'Tis for
  Ham. This?
  Ham. Thou pray'st not well.
  Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
  Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
  Ham. 'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
  Ham. 'Tis very strange.
  Ham. 'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.-
  Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
  Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
  Ham. To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not
  Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
  Ham. Up from my cabin,
  Ham. Upon my sword.
  Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
  Ham. Upon what ground?
  Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?  
  Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.
  Ham. Very well, my lord.
  Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy.
  Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
  Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;
  Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
  Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
  Ham. What?
  Ham. What call you the carriages?
  Ham. What did you enact?
  Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
  Ham. What, ho, Horatio!
  Ham. What hour now?
  Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
  Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
  Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?
  Ham. What's his weapon?
  Ham. What's the matter now?
  Ham. What woman then?
  Ham. What, the fair Ophelia?
  Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
  Ham. Who, I?
  Ham. Who commands them, sir?
  Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
  Ham. Why?
  Ham. Whose was it?
  Ham. Why,
  Ham. Why,
  Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
  Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and
  Ham. Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?
  Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd
  Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
  Ham. Why he more than another?
  Ham.   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
  Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
  Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!  
  Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
  Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
  Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
  Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
  Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
  Ham. With drink, sir?
  Ham. Words, words, words.
  Ham. You are welcome.
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
  Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
  Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
  Ham. Yours, yours. [Exit Osric.] He does well to commend it
  Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
  Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
  Ham. [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold
  Ham. [aside] Wormwood, wormwood!
  Ham. [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
  Ham. [draws] How now? a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
  Ham. [comes forward] What is he whose grief  
    Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake
    Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
    Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
    Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
    He closes with you in this consequence:
    He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman.
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
               Hautboys play. The dumb show enters.
    He likewise gives a frock or livery,
    Haply the seas, and countries different,
    He falls to such perusal of my face
    He rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
    Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
    Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
      Here stooping to your clemency,
    Hecuba.
    Hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
              He is dead and gone;
    Hamlet the Dane.                    [Leaps in after Laertes.
    He answers:
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
    Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
         He never will come again.
           He is gone, he is gone,
    Have you so slander any moment leisure
  Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
    He hath not fail'd to pester us with message
    Here in the lobby.
                           [Hamlet moves him to put on his hat.]
    Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
    He may not, as unvalued persons do,
    Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
         Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd  
    Have by the very cunning of the scene
    Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
    Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
  Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!
    Here's to thy health.
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.  
    Her father and myself (lawful espials)
    Hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
           Hath clawed me in his clutch,
    Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
    Help, help, ho!
    Here's yet some liquor left.
    Hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
    He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
    He never gave commandment for their death.
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
                                                    [He] sleeps.
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
    He took my father grossly, full of bread,
    He seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
    His access to me.
    He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
    He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
    Her mood will needs be pitied.
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
         His beard was as white as snow,
                            'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'
    He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
    Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
    He should the bearers put to sudden death,
    He that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
    He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
    High on a stage be placed to the view;
    His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
    His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
    His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
    His further gait herein, in that the levies,
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
    His means of death, his obscure funeral-
    His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
    His silence will sit drooping.
    His liberty is full of threats to all-
    His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
    Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
    Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
    Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
    Holds such an enmity with blood of man
    Hold you the watch to-night?
      Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
  Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
  Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
  Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing  
  Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;  
  Hor. A piece of him.
  Hor. As thou art to thyself.
  Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
  Hor. Ay, good my lord.
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe
  Hor. Ay, my lord.
  Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.
  Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
  Hor. Custom hath made it in him a Property of easiness.
  Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
  Hor. E'en so.
  Hor. Do not, my lord!
  Hor. E'en so, my lord.
  Hor. Friends to this ground.
  Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
  Hor. Hail to your lordship!
  Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
  Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
  Hor. Half a share.
  Hor. Heaven secure him!
  Hor. Heaven will direct it.
  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
  Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Hor. I beseech you.
  Hor. I did very well note him.
  Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
  Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
  Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
  Hor. In faith,
  Hor. In what particular thought to work I know not;
  Hor. Is it a custom?
  Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.  
  Hor. Is't possible?
  Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
  Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
  Hor. It might, my lord.
  Hor. It must be shortly known to him from England
  Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
  Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
  Hor. Let them come in.
  Hor. Let him bless thee too.
  Hor. I warr'nt it will.
  Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
  Hor. Most constantly.
  Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
  Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
  Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
  Hor. My lord, I did;
  Hor. My lord, the King your father.
  Hor. Nay, good my lord -
  Hor. Nay, very pale.
  Hor. Never believe it.
  Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
  Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!
  Hor. No, by no means!
  Hor. Not when I saw't.
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
  Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
  Hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
  Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
  Hor. O, my dear lord!
  Hor. O, where, my lord?
  Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
  Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
  Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.  
  Hor. Remember it, my lord!
  Hor. Season your admiration for a while
  Hor. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
  Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it.
  Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
  Hor. That can I.
  Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
  Hor. That is most certain.
  Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
  Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
  Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
  Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.  
  Hor. 'Tis here!
  Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
  Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
  Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
  Hor. 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.  
  Hor. Well, my lord.
  Hor. Very well, my lord.
  Hor. Well, sit we down,
  Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
  Hor. What news, my lord?
  Hor. What's that, my lord?
  Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
  Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
  Hor. What is it you will see?
  Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
  Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
  Hor. You might have rhym'd.
  Hor. Why, what a king is this!
  Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
  Hor. [aside] His purse is empty already. All's golden words are
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.
    Horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
    Horatio!- or I do forget myself.
  Horatio, friend to Hamlet.
  Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
  Hor. (within) My lord, my lord!
    How all occasions do inform against me
    How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
    How does my good Lord Hamlet?
    How dost thou, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that
    How does your honour for this many a day?
    How in my words somever she be shent,
    Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.             Exit.
    How much I had to do to calm his rage I
    How now O What hath befall'n?
    How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
    How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
    How now? What news?
    How now, sweet queen?
         How should I your true-love know
    How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
    How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself
    How these things came about. So shall You hear
    How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
    How to forget that learning; but, sir, now  
    Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
    Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
    I am afeard You make a wanton of me.
    Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
    I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
    I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
    I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
    I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
    I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
    I be so able as now.
    I bought an unction of a mountebank,
    I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.  
    I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
    I cannot live to hear the news from England,
    I chiefly lov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it
    I could not but by her. The other motive
    I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
    If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
    I do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
    I did repel his letters and denied
    If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
      If, once a widow, ever I be wife!
    If his chief good and market of his time
    If there be any good thing to be done,
    If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
    I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
    If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
    If by direct or by collateral hand
    If I had play'd the desk or table book,
    I do not know from what part of the world
    I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
    If circumstances lead me, I will find
    If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
    If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
    If this did blast in proof. Soft! let me see.
    I do beseech you give him leave to go.
    If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
    If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
    I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
    If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
    If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
    If Hamlet from himself be taken away,
    I do receive your offer'd love like love,
    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
    If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
    If it be made of penetrable stuff;
    If damned custom have not braz'd it so
    If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
    If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
    If with too credent ear you list his songs,
    If you desire to know the certainty
    If you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his  
    I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
    I had my father's signet in my purse,
    I had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
    I ha't!
    I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
    I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze
    I have a voice and precedent of peace
    I have in quick determination
    I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,
    I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
    I have sworn't.
    I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe  
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send
    I hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
    I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
    I hop'd thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
    I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
    I'll blessing beg of you.- For this same lord,  
    I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
    I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
    I'll cross it, though it blast me.- Stay illusion!
    I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
    I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.-
    I'll rant as well as thou.
    I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
    I'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
    I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
    I'll visit you.
    I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
    I made to her in marriage, and to decline
    I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.
    Importing Denmark's health, and England's too,
    Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
    Importing the surrender of those lands
    Importing health and graveness. Two months since
    I must be cruel, only to be kind;
    In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
      In Mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
    In censure of his seeming.
    Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
    In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
    In equal scale weighing delight and dole,
    Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
    I never gave you aught.
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
    In going back to school in Wittenberg,
    In filial obligation for some term
      In general synod take away her power;
    In further evil?
    'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
    In honourable fashion.
    In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
    In hugger-mugger to inter him; Poor Ophelia
    In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
    In the corrupted currents of this world
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
    In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
    In thee there is not half an hour of life.
    Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
    In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
      In neither aught, or in extremity.
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    In obstinate condolement is a course
    In the dead vast and middle of the night
    In noise so rude against me?
    Into a tow'ring passion.
    Into the madness wherein now he raves,
    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
       In youth when I did love, did love,
    I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
    I pray you go with me.
    I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
    I pray you, now receive them.
    Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
    I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
    'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'
    I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow thee.
    Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
    Is by a forged process of my death
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
    Is it not monstrous that this player here,
    Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
    Is not to stir without great argument,
    I shall not look upon his like again.
    I should have fatted all the region kites
    Is not this something more than fantasy?
    Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
    I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
    Is strict in his arrest) O, I could tell you-
    I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
    I stay too long. But here my father comes.
    Is the great love the general gender bear him,
    Is the main motive of our preparations,
    Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
    Is very cunning in.
    Is thought-sick at the act.
           'It came to pass, as most like it was.'
    It could not move thus.  
    It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
    It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
    It had been so with us, had we been there.
    It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
    I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
    It is 'Adieu, adieu! Remember me.'  
    It is most retrograde to our desire;
    It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
    It is a poison temper'd by himself.
    It lifted up it head and did address
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
    It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
    It may be death.
    It sends some precious instance of itself
    Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
    I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
    It shall as level to your judgment pierce
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
    It warms the very sickness in my heart
    It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
    It was against your Highness; whereat griev'd,
    It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
    It waves you to a more removed ground.
    I will bestow him, and will answer well
    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    It will be laid to us, whose providence
    I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
    I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.
    I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
    I would know that.
    I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
    I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
  King. A Norman.
  King. Arm you, I pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
  King. Alas, alas!
  King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
  King. As of a man faithful and honourable.
  King. At supper? Where?
  King. Ay, Hamlet.
  King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
  King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
  King. Bring him before us.
  King. But how hath she
  King. But where is he?
  King. Conceit upon her father.
  King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
  King. Dead.
  King. Do you think 'tis this?
    King. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
  King. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
  King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
  King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  King. Gertrude, do not drink.
    King. Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
  King. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
  King. Go seek him there. [To Attendants.]
  King. Give me some light! Away!
  King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
  King. Good Laertes,
  King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,-
  King. Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
  King. He made confession of you;
    King. I do believe you think what now you speak;
  King. How fares our cousin Hamlet?
  King. How do you, pretty lady?
  King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
  King. How long hath she been thus?
  King. How may we try it further?
  King. I do not fear it, I have seen you both;
  King. I do not think't.
  King. If it be so, Laertes
  King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
  King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words are not
  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
  King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
  King. It likes us well;
  King. It shall be so.
  King. It falls right.
  King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
  King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
  King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
  King. Let's follow, Gertrude.  
  King. Let him demand his fill.
  King. Let's further think of this,
  King. Love? his affections do not that way tend;  
  King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
  King. Not that I know.
  King. Not that I think you did not love your father;
  King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
  King. O Gertrude, come away!
  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
  King. O heavy deed!
  King. O, for two special reasons,
  King. Our son shall win.
  King. Pluck thein asunder.
  King. Part them! They are incens'd.
  King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
  King. O, he is mad, Laertes.
  King. O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
  King. Pretty Ophelia!
  King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
  King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
  King. So you shall;
  King. She sounds to see them bleed.
  King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
  King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;
  King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
  King. Thanks, dear my lord.
  King. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
  King. The very same.
  King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
  King. The doors are broke.
  King. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
  King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
  King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.
    King. 'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
  King. 'Tis Hamlet's character. 'Naked!'
  King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
  King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
  King. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd
  King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
  King. Well, we shall sift him.
  King. We will try it.
  King. What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
  King. What dost thou mean by this?  
  King. What do you call the play?
  King. What is the cause, Laertes,
  King. Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
  King. Where is Polonius?
  King. Who shall stay you?
  King. Why, now You speak
  King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
  King. Will you know them then?
    King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?
  King. [aside] O, 'tis too true!
  King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
  King. [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
  King. [rises] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
  Laer. A Norman was't?
  Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
  Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
  Laer. And so have I a noble father lost;
  Laer. A touch, a touch; I do confess't.
  Laer. Ay my lord,
  Laer. Come, my lord.                                They play.
  Laer. Come, one for me.
  Laer. Do you see this, O God?
  Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
  Laer. Farewell.                                          Exit.
  Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
  Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
  Laer. Have at you now!
  Laer. He is justly serv'd.
  Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
  Laer. I am satisfied in nature,
  Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!
  Laer. How now? What noise is that?
  Laer. I pray you give me leave.
  Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
  Laer. It well appears. But tell me
  Laer. Know you the hand?
  Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
  Laer. I will do't!
  Laer. I thank you. Keep the door.      [Exeunt his Followers.]
  Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
  Laer. Let this be so.
  Laer. O, fear me not!
  Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
  Laer. My will, not all the world!
  Laer. No.
  Laer. Must there no more be done?
  Laer. None but his enemies.
  Laer. Think it no more.
  Laer. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
  Laer. My lord, I will be rul'd;
  Laer. My dread lord,
  Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
  Laer. O, treble woe
  Laer. My lord, I'll hit him now.
  Laer. The devil take thy soul!
  Laer. Say you so? Come on.                               Play.
  Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
  Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
  Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
  Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
  Laer. Upon my life, Lamound.
  Laer. To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
  Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!
  Laer. Well, again!
  Laer. What ceremony else?
  Laer. What ceremony else?
  Laer. What out of this, my lord?
  Laer. Where is this king?- Sirs, staid you all without.
  Laer. Where is my father?
  Laer. What part is that, my lord?
  Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
  Laer. Why ask you this?
  Laer. You mock me, sir.
  Laer. [aside] And yet it is almost against my conscience.
    Laertes before you fall to play.  
                                                [Laertes falls.]
    'Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!'
  Laertes, son to Polonius.
    Larded with many several sorts of reasons,
           Larded all with sweet flowers;
                [Laertes wounds Hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
    Last, and as such containing as all these,
                                             Leaps in the grave.
    Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
    Leave us.
    Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! sit you down
    Led by a delicate and tender prince,
    Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
    Lest with this piteous action you convert
    Let Hercules himself do what he may,
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
    Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd
    Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.  
    Let his queen mother all alone entreat him  
            Let in the maid, that out a maid
    Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
    Let it be tenable in your silence still;
    Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
    Let me be no assistant for a state,  
    Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-
    Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
    Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
    Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed;
    Let us impart what we have seen to-night
    Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,  
                         [Lifts up the arras and sees Polonius.]
    Like a good child and a true gentleman.
    Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
    Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
    Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
    Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places  
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,-
    Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
    Looking before and after, gave us not
    Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Look to't, I charge you. Come your ways.
    Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
    Look you, I'll go pray.
    'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
    Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
  Lord. My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who
  Lord. The King and Queen and all are coming down.
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
  Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.
    Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
    Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
Lords Attendant.
    Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.         Exeunt.
    Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
  Lord. The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
    Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    Makes vow before his uncle never more
    Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
    Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
      Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
            [Makes a pass through the arras and] kills Polonius.
    Make you to ravel all this matter out,
    Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
    Makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
    Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
  Mar. And liegemen to the Dane.
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,  
  Mar. Look with what courteous action
  Mar. It is offended.
  Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
  Mar. Is it not like the King?
  Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
  Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
  Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
  Mar. Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
  Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
  Mar. My good lord!
  Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
  Mar. Lord Hamlet!
  Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
  Mar. Holla, Bernardo!
  Mar. Nor I, my lord- in faith.
  Mar. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
  Mar. O, wonderful!
  Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
  Mar. No, it is struck.
  Mar. Nor I, my lord.
  Mar. Question it, Horatio.
  Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
  Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
  Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
  Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
  Mar. 'Tis gone and will not answer.
  Mar. 'Tis gone!
  Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
  Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
  Mar. You shall not go, my lord.
    Marcellus?
  Marcellus, Officer.
  Marcellus, officer.
    (Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch
                                                 [March within.]
    Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
    Mark you,
    May be a devil; and the devil hath power
    May fit us to our shape. If this should fall,
    May do t' express his love and friending to you,
    May give his saying deed; which is no further
    May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
    May sweep to my revenge.
    Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
         Methought it was very sweet;
  Mess. Save Yourself, my lord:
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
  Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
  Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
      Meet what I would have well, and it destroy,
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
    Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
    Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
    Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
    Moreover that we much did long to see you,
    More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
    More relative than this. The play's the thing
    More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
    More than in words?
    Most free in his reply.
    Most holy and religious fear it is
    Most generous, and free from all contriving,
    Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
    Most throughly for my father.
      Most necessary 'tis that we forget
    Most welcome home!                       Exeunt Ambassadors.
    Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor
    Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
    Must give us pause. There's the respect
    Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
    Must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
    Must render up myself.
    My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
    My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good
    My custom always of the afternoon,
    My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
    My father- methinks I see my father.
    My good friends, I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to
    My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
    My head should be struck off.
    My father's brother, but no more like my father
    My lord, not I.
    My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
    My liege, and madam, to expostulate
    My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
    (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal
    My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
    My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
      My operant powers their functions leave to do.
      My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
    My soul is full of discord and dismay.
    My stern effects. Then what I have to do
    My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
    My tables! Meet it is I set it down
    My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
    My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!            Exit.
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-
    My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
    My too much changed son.- Go, some of you,
    My uncle?
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
    Nay, come, let's go together.  
Near Elsinore.
    Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
      Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
    Never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
              Never departed more.
    Never to speak of this that you have heard:
    New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
    Next, Your son gone, and he most violent author
    No.
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
    No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
    No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day
    No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
    No medicine in the world can do thee good.
    No more.
    No more; and by a sleep to say we end
    No more to undertake it, I will work him
    No more, sweet Hamlet!
      None wed the second but who killed the first.
    Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
    No noble rite nor formal ostentation,-
    No reckoning made, but sent to my account
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe,
           No, no, he is dead;  
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
    Nor customary suits of solemn black,
    Nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
    Nor shall you do my ear that violence
    Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
    Nor thine on me!                                       Dies.
    Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,
    Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
    Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
      Now falls on Priam.
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
    No traveller returns- puzzles the will,
    Now I am alone.  
    Not shriving time allow'd.
    Now fear I this will give it start again;
    Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
    Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
    Now, out of this-
         Now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
    Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
    Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
    (O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
      Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;
    'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin.
    Now wears his crown.
         O, a Pit of clay for to be made  
    Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
    Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
      'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to
    O'erbears Your offices. The rabble call him lord;
    O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
    O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,  
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
    Of Hamlet's transformation. So I call it,
    Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
         Of Jove himself; and now reigns here
    Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
    Of all their conference. If she find him not,
    Of bell and burial.
    Of blue Olympus.
    Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
    Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
    Of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
    Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
    Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
    Of him that brought them.
    Of general assault.  
    Of his affection to me.
    Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
    Of his behaviour.
    Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief;
    Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
    Of his true state.
    Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
    Of man and country-
    Of mighty opposites.
    Of mine own eyes.  
    Of my true mother.
      Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
    Of the unworthiest siege.
    Of these dilated articles allow.            [Gives a paper.]
    Of thinking too precisely on th' event,-
    Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
    Of those effects for which I did the murther-
    O good Horatio, what a wounded name
      Of violent birth, but poor validity;
    Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
    Of unimproved mettle hot and full,  
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in Your revenge
    O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
    O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
    O heavens! is't possible a young maid's wits
    O heavy burthen!
    O, ho!
         Old grandsire Priam seeks.'
    O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
         O, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
    O most pernicious woman!
    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
    On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
      On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
    On Fortune's cap we are not the very button.
         'One fair daughter, and no more,
    One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
    One word more, good lady.
    On plots and errors happen.
    On such regards of safety and allowance
  Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
      On wholesome life usurp immediately.
  Oph. At home, my lord.
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
  Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
  Oph. Do you doubt that?
  Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
  Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
  Oph. Good my lord,
  Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think,
  Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but I cannot
  Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't!
  Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
  Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
  Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
  Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
  Oph. I was the more deceived.
  Oph. Madam, I wish it may.
  Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
  Oph. My lord?
  Oph. My lord, I do not know,
  Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours
  Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
  Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love
  Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
  Oph. No more but so?
  Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
  Oph. No, my lord.
  Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
  Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
  Oph. O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
  Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
  Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
  Oph. Pray you mark.
  Oph. Say you? Nay, pray You mark.
  Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord.
  Oph. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.  
  Oph. Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
  Oph. (Sings)
  Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
  Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
  Oph. What is, my lord?
  Oph. Still better, and worse.
  Oph. You are merry, my lord.
  Oph. Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.  
  Oph. The King rises.
  Ophelia, daughter to Polonius.
  Oph. (sings)
  Oph. (sings)
  Oph. You must sing 'A-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.' O,
  Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
  Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
  Oph. (sings)
  Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
  Oph. What means this, my lord?
  Oph. What means your lordship?
  Oph. 'Tis in my memory lock'd,
      Ophelia,'-
  Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?
    Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
    Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
    Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
    Or but a sickly part of one true sense
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
    Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
    Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
    Or for some frontier?
    Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
    Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
    Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
    Or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
    Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?  
    Or like a creature native and indued
    Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
    Or not at all.
    Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
    Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
    (O royal knavery!), an exact command,
    Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
    Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;
    Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
    Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
    Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
    Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
    Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd  
    Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
    Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
    Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
    O, say!
    O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
    O, speak!
  Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
  Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
  Osr. How is't, Laertes?
  Osr. Ay, my good lord.
  Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
  Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
  Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
  Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
  Osr. Look to the Queen there, ho!
  Osr. Nothing neither way.
  Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
  Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
  Osr. Sir?
  Osr. Of Laertes?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
  Osr. Shall I redeliver you e'en so?
  Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
  Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
  Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
  Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
  Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
  Osric, courtier.
    O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
    O, step between her and her fighting soul
  Other. But is this law?
  Other. Go to!
  Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
  Other. Marry, now I can tell!
  Other. Mass, I cannot tell.
  Other. Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver!
  Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand  
  Other. Was he a gentleman?
  Other. Why, he had none.
  Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
  Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
  Other. Why, 'tis found so.
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
    O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
    O thou vile king,
    Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
    Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
    Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
    Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
    Our purpose may hold there.- But stay, what noise,
    Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
    Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
      Our wills and fates do so contrary run
      Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
    Out of his lunacies.
    Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
    Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
    Out of the shot and danger of desire.
    O, vengeance!
      Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,  
    Over the nasty sty!
    Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
    O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
    O what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
  Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
    Perchance 'twill walk again.
  Players.
  Pol. 'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.
    Pleasant and helpful to him!
  Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
  1. Play. 'Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
  Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
    Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
  Pol. At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
  Pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- Ay, marry!
    Perpend.
  Player. I warrant your honour.
    Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
    Passing through nature to eternity.  
    O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
  Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
  Pol. And let him ply his music.
  Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently.
    O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I
  Pol. Away, I do beseech you, both away
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
    Pays homage to us,- thou mayst not coldly set
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
    Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
  1. Play. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'
  1. Play. 'Anon he finds him,
  Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
  1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
  Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
    Play something like the murther of my father
  Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
  Pol. Come, sirs.
  Pol. Do you know me, my lord?
  Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
  Pol. Farewell!
  Pol. Fare you well, my lord.
  Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
  Pol. Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
  Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
  Pol. Give o'er the play.
  Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
  Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.     [Reads.]  
  Pol. Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-
  Pol. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
  Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
  Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
  Pol. Honest, my lord?
  Pol. I did enact Julius Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brutus
  Pol. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
  Pol. I have, my lord.
  Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
  Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
  Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [Aside] How pregnant sometimes
  Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I believe
  Pol. I will say so.                                      Exit.
  Pol. Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
  Pol. Marry, I will teach you! Think yourself a baby
  Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,  
  Pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
  Pol. Mad for thy love?  
  Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
  Pol. Marry, well bethought!
  Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
  Pol. My lord, I have news to tell you.
  Pol. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
  Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
  Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
  Pol. Not I, my lord.
  Pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.  
  Pol. Ophelia, walk you here.- Gracious, so please you,
  Pol. That's very true, my lord.
  Pol. That's good! 'Mobled queen' is good.
  Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
  Pol. That hath made him mad.
  Pol. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
  Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
  Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
  Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
  Pol. This business is well ended.
  Pol. 'Tis most true;
  Pol. This is too long.
  Pol. Upon my honour-
  Pol. Very like a whale.
  Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!
  Pol. What do you think of me?
  Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
  Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?
  Pol. What follows then, my lord?
  Pol. What said he?
  Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
  Pol. Wherefore should you do this?
  Pol. With what, i' th' name of God I
  Pol. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
  Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
  Pol. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
  Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
  Pol. [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
  Pol. [behind] O, I am slain!
                                                       Polonius.
  Pol. [aside] Though this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-
  Pol. [aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
  Pol. [aside] Still on my daughter.
Polonius, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelius,]
  Polonius, Lord Chamberlain.
                              [Polonius hides behind the arras.]
  Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] Take this from this, if this
    Popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
  Pol. [to the King] O, ho! do you mark that?
    Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
                                   Pours the poison in his ears.
    Pray you be round with him.
                                                Prepare to play.
  Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
  Priest. No more be done.
    Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
    Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
    Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
      Purpose is but the slave to memory,
    Pursued my life.
                                          [Puts down the skull.]
    Put your dread pleasures more into command
      Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
  Queen. Alack,
  Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
  Queen. Alas, he's mad!
  Queen. Alas, how is't with you,  
  Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
  Queen. As kill a king?
  Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
  Queen. Ay, amen!
  Queen. Ay me, what act,
  Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
  Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
  Queen. But not by him!
  Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
  Queen. Calmly, good Laertes.
  Queen. Came this from Hamlet to her?
  Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Queen. Did he receive you well?
  Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
  Queen. Did you assay him  
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
  Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet!
  Queen. For love of God, forbear him!
  Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
  Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
  Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
  Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
  Queen. Have you forgot me?
  Queen. How now, Ophelia?
  Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; I hear him coming.
  Queen. If it be,
  Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
  Queen. How fares my lord?
  Queen. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.          Drinks.
  Queen. I shall obey you;
             Queen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.]
  Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!  
  Queen. I will not speak with her.
  Queen. Let her come in.  
  Queen. Nay, but Ophelia-
  Queen. More matter, with less art.
  Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
  Queen. No more!
  Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
  Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
  Queen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
    Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
  Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
  Queen. O Hamlet, speak no more!
  Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
    Queen. O, confound the rest!
  Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
    [Reads]'High and Mighty,-You shall know I am set naked on your
    Repast them with my blood.
    Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
  Queen. What have I done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
  Queen. it may be, very like.
  Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
  Queen. So he does indeed.
  Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.  
            Quoth she, 'Before you tumbled me,
  Queen. O, speak to me no more!
    Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,  
    Receiv'd his love?
    Queen. The instances that second marriage move
  Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet?  
  Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
  Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
  Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
    Rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
  Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
  Queen. What shall I do?
  Queen. O my son, what theme?  
  Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
  Queen. What would she have?
  Queen. This is mere madness;
                                             [Reads] the letter.
      Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
    Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
  Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
  Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
  Queen. To whom do you speak this?
    Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
                                                        [Reads.]
    Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
      Repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
    Requite him for your father.  
    Resembles that it was. What it should be,
    Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's
  Rey. My lord, I have.
                                         [Retires with Horatio.]  
  Rey. At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and  
  Rey. Good my lord!                                    [Going.]
    Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.  
  Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.  
  Rey. I shall, my lord.
    Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.
  Rey. Well, my lord.
  Reynaldo, servant to Polonius.
  Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.
    Rome-
    Richer than that which four successive kings
    Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
  Rey. But, my good lord-
  Rey. Very good, my lord.
  Rey. As gaming, my lord.
  Rey. Ay, my lord,
  Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
  Rey. My lord, I did intend it.
  Rey. I will, my lord.
  Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
    Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
  Ros. Both your Majesties
  Ros. Believe what?
  Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
  Ros. Good my lord!
  Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
  Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
  Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
  Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
  Ros. Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
  Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself
  Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
  Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
  Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
  Ros. Most like a gentleman.
  Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.  
  Ros. My most dear lord!
  Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
  Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
  Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
  Ros. Neither, my lord.
  Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
  Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
  Ros. No indeed are they not.  
  Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
  Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
  Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
  Ros. Then is the world one.
  Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
  Ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
  Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
  Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
  Ros. To what end, my lord?
  Ros. We shall, my lord.
  Ros. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
  Ros. We think not so, my lord.
  Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
  Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for your
  Ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
  Ros. [aside to Guildenstern] What say you?
    Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
  Rosencrantz, courtier.
  Ros. [to Polonius] God save you, sir!
SCENE.- Elsinore.
    Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.  
    Rough-hew them how we will-
    Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
  Sailor. 'A shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
  Sailor. God bless you, sir.
    Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
    Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
    Say, why is this? wherefore? What should we do?
                                             [Scatters flowers.]
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
Scene V.
Scene V.
Scene VI.
Scene VII.
    Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
      Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
    See what a grace was seated on this brow;
    Seem to me all the uses of this world!
    See you now-
  Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
    Shall in the general censure take corruption
    Set your entreatments at a higher rate
    She's so conjunctive to my life and soul
    Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
    She should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd
    She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
    Shall you my son. You have me, have you not
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
    She turns to favour and to prettiness.
    Should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
    Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
    Should have a back or second, that might hold
    Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
    Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
      Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,
    Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
    Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
    Since nature cannot choose his origin,-
    Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
    Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
    [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity,  
    [Sings] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
    (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,  
    [Sings] O, a pit of clay for to be made
    (Sings) To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
    (Sings) White his shroud as the mountain snow-
    Sir, in this audience,
    Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
    Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
    Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
                                  [Sits down at Ophelia's feet.]  
    Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
      So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
    So bloodily hast struck.
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    So, by my former lecture and advice,
    So crimeful and so capital in nature,
    So excellent a king, that was to this
      So far from cheer and from your former state.
    So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
    So fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
    So full of artless jealousy is guilt
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
    So horridly to shake our disposition
    Soil our addition; and indeed it takes
    So levied as before, against the Polack;
    Some little time; so by your companies
    So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
    Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
    So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
    So much as from occasion you may glean,  
    So nightly toils the subject of the land,
    So much from th' understanding of himself,
    So oft it chances in particular men
    So, proceed you.
    So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
      So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
    So to seduce!- won to his shameful lust
    So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
    Sound a flourish. [Enter Trumpets and Kettledrums. Danish
            'So would I 'a' done, by yonder sun,
    So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
    Speak loudly for him.
    Speak to her, Hamlet.
    Speak, man.
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
    Speak to me.  
      Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
    Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
                                               Spreads his arms.
    Speak to me.
    Sprung from neglected love.- How now, Ophelia?
    Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
    Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
    Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
    Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
    Stick fiery off indeed.
    Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
    Stood challenger on mount of all the age
      Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
      Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
    Subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
    Such as it is; and for my own poor part,
    Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?  
      Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
    Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
    Such was the very armour he had on
    Swear.
    Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
    Swear by my sword.
    Swear by my sword.
    'Swounds, I should take it! for it cannot be
THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK
THE END
    Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
    Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
      Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo! his sword,
    Take these again; for to the noble mind
    Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
    Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
    T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    Termagant. It out-herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.
    Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
    Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
    Than Young Laertes, in a riotous head,
    Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
    Than is my deed to my most painted word.
    Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
    Than fly to others that we know not of?
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
    Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
    Than that which dearest father bears his son
    Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
    Than to entreaty.
    Than your particular demands will touch it.
    Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
    That I am guiltless of your father's death,
      That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
    That I essentially am not in madness,
    That I must be their scourge and minister.
    That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
    That I must call't in question.
    That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
    That I might be the organ.
    That I have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
    That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
    That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,
    That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
    That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'
    That I have longed long to re-deliver.
    That are so fortified against our story,
    That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
    That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,
    That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,  
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    That are but mutes or audience to this act,
    That, being of so young clays brought up with him,
    That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    'That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
    That cannot be; since I am still possess'd
    That else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
    That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
    That flesh is heir to. 'Tis a consummation  
    That ever I was born to set it right!
    That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
    That capability and godlike reason
      That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
    That for a fantasy and trick of fame
    That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
    That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
    That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
    That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
    That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
    That has no relish of salvation in't-
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    That hath in it no profit but the name.
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
    That he could nothing do but wish and beg
    That he is open to incontinency.
    That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
    That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
    That he should weep for her? What would he do,
    That he which hath your noble father slain
    That hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
    That, if again this apparition come,
    That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
    That it went hand in hand even with the vow
    That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
    That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
    That it might please you to give quiet pass
         That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
    That, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
    That live and feed upon your Majesty.
    That makes calamity of so long life.
    That looks so many fadoms to the sea
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    That might your nature, honour, and exception
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
    That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
    That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
    That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    That, open'd, lies within our remedy.
      That our devices still are overthrown;
    That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
    That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
    That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
    That she should lock herself from his resort,
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
    That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
    That show of such an exercise may colour
    That so his sickness, age, and impotence
    That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
    That swift as quicksilverr it courses through
    That swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
    That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
    That they do know my son, come you more nearer
    That they may seem the taints of liberty,
    That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
    That thou so many princes at a shot
    That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
    That thus he suffers for.
    That to Laertes I forgot myself,
    That thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
    That to the use of actions fair and good
    That treason can but peep to what it would,
    That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
    That was and is the question of these wars.
    That we can let our beard be shook with danger,
    That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
    That we find out the cause of this effect-
    That we with wisest sorrow think on him
    That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
    That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
    That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
    That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
    That youth and observation copied there,
    That you know aught of me- this is not to do,
    That your good beauties be the happy cause
    That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
    T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
    Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
    The Devil himself.
             [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the
    The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
The Queen's closet.
    The King is a thing-
    The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
    The apparition comes. I knew your father.
    The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
                    [The King puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
    The Scripture says Adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll
    The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
    The bark is ready and the wind at help,
    The bell then beating one-
    The better to beguile. This is for all:
      The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
    The canker galls the infants of the spring
    The changeling never known. Now, the next day  
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
    The chariest maid is prodigal enough
    The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
                                                 The cock crows.
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
    The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian burial.
    The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
    The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
    The death I gave him. So again, good night.
    The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]
    The fair Ophelia!- Nymph, in thy orisons
    Th' effect of what I wrote?
    The first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
    The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
    The glowworm shows the matin to be near
    The form of plausive manners, that these men
    The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
      The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
    The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
          The hart ungalled play;
    The head and source of all your son's distemper.
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
    The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
      The instant burst of clamour that she made
    The imminent death of twenty thousand men
    The insolence of office, and the spurns
    The inward service of the mind and soul
    Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio
    Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
    The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
      Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
    The leperous distilment; whose effect
    The lists, and full proportions are all made
    The light and careless livery that it wears
    The lives of many. The cesse of majesty
    The memory be green, and that it us befitted
    Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
    The natural gates and alleys of the body,
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
    The need we have to use you did provoke
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
            Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
    Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hurts the King.
    Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
    The origin and commencement of his grief
      The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
    The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
    The pith and marrow of our attribute.
      The poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
    The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;  
    The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
    The portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.
    The rather, if you could devise it so
    The ratifiers and props of every word,
    There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
    There falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
    Therefore I have entreated him along,  
    Therefore let's follow.
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
    There is a play to-night before the King.
    There is no shuffling; there the action lies
    Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
    There lives within the very flame of love
    There, my lord.
    There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
    There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
    There's such divinity doth hedge a king
    There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
    There with fantastic garlands did she come
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
    There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
    Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast-'
    The safety and health of this whole state,
    These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
    These hands are not more like.
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life
    These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
    The soldiers' music and the rites of war
    The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
    The source of this our watch, and the chief head
    The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
    The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You
    The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
      The tedious day with sleep.
    The terms of our estate may not endure
    The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
    The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
    The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
    The triumph of his pledge.
    The unseen good old man.
    The trumpet to the cannoneer without,  
    The undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
    The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
    The very faculties of eyes and ears.
    The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
    The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
      The violence of either grief or joy
    The very place puts toys of desperation,
    The very soul, and sweet religion makes
           The which he loved passing well.'
    They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
    Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
         They bore him barefac'd on the bier
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat
    They clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
    The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
    Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
    The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.
    They cry 'Choose we! Laertes shall be king!'
    They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
    They had begun the play. I sat me down;
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
    The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
    They shall go far with little.  
    They were given me by Claudio; he receiv'd them
                                                   [They swear.]
    Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
    Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
      'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
    Th' important acting of your dread command?
    (Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!
    Thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
    This bodiless creation ecstasy
    This above all- to thine own self be true,
    This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
    This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet
    This grave shall have a living monument.
    This heavy-headed revel east and west
    This is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point
    This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.
    This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    'This must be so.' We pray you throw to earth
    This mad young man. But so much was our love
    This man shall set me packing.
    This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
    This marvel to you.
    This unprevailing woe, and think of us
    This presence knows,
    This must not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,
    This present object made probation.
    This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.
    This sudden sending him away must seem
    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.              Exit.
    This night to play before him.
    This something-settled matter in his heart,
           This realm dismantled was  
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
    This warlike volley.
      This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
    This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
    Th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
    Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.
    Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
    Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
    Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
    Though inclination be as sharp as will.
    Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
    Thou know'st already.
    Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
    Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
    Thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright  
      Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
    Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
    Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
    Through your dominions for this enterprise,
    Thrown out his angle for my Proper life,
                                      Throws up [another skull].
                                            [Throws up a skull.]
      Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
    'Thus didest thou.'
    Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,  
    Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
    Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
          Thus runs the world away.
    Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
    Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
      Thy natural magic and dire property
    Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
    Till by some elder masters of known honour
    Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
    Till of this flat a mountain you have made
    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
    Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
    Till then in patience our proceeding be.
    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
    Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,  
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
    Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
    'Tis heavy with him; and am I then reveng'd,
    'Tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
    To England send him; or confine him where
    To any pastime?
    [To Laertes] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
    To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
    'Tis now the very witching time of night,
    'Tis strange.
    'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
    'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
    To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
    To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,  
      To desperation turn my trust and hope,
    To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
    To both your honours.
    To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
              To be your Valentine.
    To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
    To business with the King, more than the scope
    To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever  
    To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
    To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
    To be commanded.
    To be contracted in one brow of woe,
    Together with remembrance of ourselves.
    To fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
       To contract- O- the time for- a- my behove,
    To exploit now ripe in my device,
    To be forestalled ere we come to fall,  
    To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean  
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
    T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
    To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
    To give it due content.
    To give these mourning duties to your father;
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.
    To give the world assurance of a man.
    To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
    To hear him so inclin'd.
    To hear and see the matter.
    To have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
    To hear of it. They are here about the court,
    To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
    To heaven.
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil
    To him from whom you brought them.                   Exeunt.
    To his confine; and of the truth herein
    To his unmast'red importunity.
    To keep it from divulging, let it feed
    To keep itself from noyance; but much more
    To keep my name ungor'd. But till that time
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
    To keep those many many bodies safe
    To lay our service freely at your feet,
    To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
    To let you know of it.
    To make it truster of your own report
    To mine own room again; making so bold  
    To outface me with leaping in her grave?
    To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
    To offer it the show of violence;
    To my revenge. But in my terms of honour
    Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;  
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this
    Too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
    To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
    To muddy death.
      To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
    To let this canker of our nature come
    To put an antic disposition on),  
    To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
    To punish me with this, and this with me,
    To quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
    To reason most absurd, whose common theme
    To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
    To serve in such a difference. What devil was't
    To show my duty in your coronation,  
    To sing a requiem and such rest to her
    To show us so much gentry and good will
    To show yourself your father's son in deed
    To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
    To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
    To speak of horrors- he comes before me.
    To take him in the purging of his soul,
    To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
    To tell my story.         [March afar off, and shot within.]
    To tell us this.
    To tell the secrets of my prison house,
    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
    To the ambassadors of England gives
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
         To their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
    To the unsatisfied.
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;
    To those of mine!
    To try conclusions, in the basket creep
    Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
    To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
    To what I shall unfold.
    To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
    To you in satisfaction; but if not,  
    To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
    To you alone.
    Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
    Transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name
    Until my eyelids will no longer wag.
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
    Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor  
    Ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
    Unto that element; but long it could not be
      (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
    Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
    To you yourself, to us, to every one.  
    To youth and liberty.
    Treachery! Seek it out.
    Unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
      Unite comutual in most sacred bands.
    Unto the voice and yielding of that body
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.
    Unto our climature and countrymen.
    Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
    Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
    Try what repentance can. What can it not?
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
    Unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
    Under the moon, can save the thing from death
  Two Clowns, gravediggers.
    Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
    Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
    Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
    Truly deliver.
    Unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
    'Twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
    Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
    Upon whose property and most dear life
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
    Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
    Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
    Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.
    Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
  Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.
  Voltemand, courtier.
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
    Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
    Was gaged by our king; which had return'd
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
    Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
    Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
    Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet.
      We beg your hearing patiently.                     [Exit.]
    We cannot get from him.  
    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    We go to gain a little patch of ground
    We heard it all.- My lord, do as you please;
    Weigh what convenience both of time and means
    Welcome, my good friends.
    We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
    Well may it sort that this portentous figure
    We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
    We'll put the matter to the present push.-
    Well ratified by law and heraldry,
    We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
    We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
    We may of their encounter frankly judge
    We must with all our majesty and skill
    Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    We shall express our duty in his eye;
    We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
    We should profane the service of the dead
    We will bestow ourselves.- [To Ophelia] Read on this book,
    We would not understand what was most fit,
    What I have said to you.
    What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
    What does this mean, my lord?
    What company, at what expense; and finding
    What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
    What, is Horatio there ?
    What, have you given him any hard words of late?
    What is between you? Give me up the truth.
    What is the matter?
    What is the issue of the business there.  
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
    What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
    What might be toward, that this sweaty haste  
    What might you think? No, I went round to work
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
    When I to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing
    What thou hast said to me.
      What to ourselves in passion we propose,
    What we two nights have seen.
    When he himself might his quietus make
    What warlike noise is this?
    What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
    When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
    What think you on't?
    When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
    What's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
    When in your motion you are hot and dry-  
    When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us
    When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,
    When he th' ambitious Norway combated.
    When it prov'd otherwise.?
      When second husband kisses me in bed.
    When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?  
      When second husband let me be accurst!
    When in one line two crafts directly meet.  
         When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
      When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies.
    When that her golden couplets are disclos'd,  
    When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
    When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
    When thou liest howling.
    When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
    When we would bring him on to some confession
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole
    Where every god did seem to set his seal
    Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.         Exit.
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
    Wherein they say you shine, Your sun of parts
    Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
    Where is your son?
    Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
      Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
      Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
      Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
    Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
    Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
    Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
    Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
    Where should We have our thanks?
    Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
    Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.           Exeunt.
    Where you may see the inmost part of you.
    Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
      Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
    Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
    Which I have told thee, of my father's death.  
         Which bewept to the grave did not go
    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
    Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
    Which have solicited- the rest is silence.             Dies.
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
    Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
    Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
    Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
    Which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
    Which is not tomb enough and continent
    Which now goes too free-footed.
      Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,  
    Which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
    Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
      Which was declining on the milky head
    Which we do tender as we dearly grieve
    Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
    Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
    Who hath reliev'd you?
    Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
    Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
    Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
    Who is't that can inform me?
    Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
    Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
    Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,
    Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
    Whose motive in this case should stir me most
    Whose violent property fordoes itself  
    Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
    Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
    Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
      Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
    Who was in life a foolish peating knave.
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
    Why seems it so particular with thee?
    Why does the drum come hither?
    Why should we in our peevish opposition
    Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
    Why the man dies.- I humbly thank you, sir.
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
    Why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, Gertrude.
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
    Why to a public count I might not go
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
    Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,'
    Why you proceeded not against these feats
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
   Will You walk out of the air, my lord?
    Will not debate the question of this straw.
    Will nothing stick Our person to arraign
    Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
    Will return'd shall know you are come home.
    Will sate itself in a celestial bed
    Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
    Will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
    Will you be rul'd by me?
    Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
    Winner and loser?
      With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
    With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
    With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
    With all my imperfections on my head.
    With all my love I do commend me to you;
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver
         With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
    With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
    With an entreaty, herein further shown,
      With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
    With arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
    With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
    With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
         With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
    With, hoo! such bugs and goblins in my life-
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd  
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
    Within the centre.
    With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
      With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
    With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
    With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
    With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players
    Without debatement further, more or less,
    Without more motive, into every brain
    Without the sensible and true avouch
    Without the which we are Pictures or mere beasts;
    With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
    With sore distraction. What I have done
    With the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
    With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
    With windlasses and with assays of bias,
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,
    With variable objects, shall expel
    With this regard their currents turn awry
           With true-love showers.
    With us to watch the minutes of this night,
    With this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
    With which she followed my poor father's body
    With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
    With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-
    With wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
    Witness this army of such mass and charge,
    Woo't drink up esill? eat a crocodile?
    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
    Words without thoughts never to heaven go.             Exit.
    Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
    Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
    Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
      Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
    Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
    Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
    Would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;  
    Would have reverted to my bow again,
    Would make them capable.- Do not look upon me,
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
    Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother!
    Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    Yet I,
    Yes, faith, heartily.
    Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
    Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
    Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
    Yet have I in me something dangerous,
    Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
    Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
    Yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
    Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
    Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
    Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
    Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
    You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
    You are the most immediate to our throne,
    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee
    You, as your business and desires shall point you,
    You cannot call it love; for at your age
    You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
    You do remember all the circumstance?
    You do not understand yourself so clearly
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
    You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
    You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
    You go not till I set you up a glass
    You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
    You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said.
    You must not take for fire. From this time
    You mainly were stirr'd up.
    You laying these slight sullies on my son
    You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
    You know the wager?
    You must not put another scandal on him,
            Young men will do't if they come to't
              You promis'd me to wed.'
    Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
    Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone  
    Your leave and favour to return to France;
    Your loneliness.- We are oft to blame in this,
    Your party in converse, him you would sound,
    Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
    Your sudden coming o'er to play with you.
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks
    Your wisdom best shall think.
   You say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.
    You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
    You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes?
    about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
    act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
    a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.  
    action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the
    affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
    again.
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    against their own succession.
    air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
    a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
    all welcome. We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at
    alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
    altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a piece of
    amazement and admiration.
    amble, and you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make your  
    and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
    and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go  
    and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
    appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
    ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
 and then, you know,
    and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
    and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
    and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' Sundays.
    and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
    answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
    anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a
    bellow for revenge.
    be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
    believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your
    bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].
    assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French
    bet against the Danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
    beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
    argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
    beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
    are unwrung.
    as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
    bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
    article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
    are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
      be otherwise.
                                                   are shot off.  
    a thing to you from his Majesty.
    boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so I
    better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with
    bonnet to his right use. 'Tis for the head.
    breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
    brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
    but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
    brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,
by William Shakespeare
    by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
    calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
    carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts; she
    carpenter?
    carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.  
                       carrying torches.
    chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
                    change rapiers, [and Hamlet wounds Laertes].
    choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
    chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
    city? Are they so follow'd?
    church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
    counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
    clouts.
    continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
    convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your
    comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
    defence?
    dare scarce come thither.
    demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
    deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison
    desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own  
    did the first murther! This might be the pate of a Politician,
    died. They say he made a good end.
    discourse to your beauty.
     discretion.
    discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no
    discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
    do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
    dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
    dungeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.
    earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
    end.
    end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
    enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died,
    equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years
    entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
    entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
    epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'
    escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
    ere you had done.
    especially where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it live in
    excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
    faculties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in
    father?
    excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
    eyes. Prithee no more!
    favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio,
    favours?
    fay, I cannot reason.
    feather. I have of late- but wherefore I know not- lost all my
    find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
    fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
    fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
    first mouth'd, to be last Swallowed. When he needs what you have
    for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.
    form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
    for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again.- What do you
    (for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
    fortunes turn Turk with me-with two Provincial roses on my raz'd
    for your succession in Denmark?
    freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
    full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
    further trade with us?
    gentleman.'
    gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' Christian burial.
    given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
    glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
    gone, far gone! And truly in my youth I suff'red much extremity
    grave-making?
                                                         grave.]
    great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
    guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.  
    half a year. But, by'r Lady, he must build churches then; or else
    hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred
    hath sent me to you.
    have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
    have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen
    have not the skill.
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
    have sent for you.
    he.
    have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
    hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
    heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
    he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
    help to hasten them?
    heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? for, by my
    he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far
    him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
    him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
    him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
    him and my daughter.- My honourable lord, I will most humbly take
    him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
    his wife, Baptista. You shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of
    history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
    his love.
    himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
    his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which
    hold up Adam's profession.
    his authorities. But such officers do the King best service in
    honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
    his kibe.- How long hast thou been a grave-maker?
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
    hither?
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
    honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
    how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
    humanity so abominably.
    if that his Majesty would aught with us,
    image of a murther done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
    if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
    imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it
    individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
    in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those
    innovation.
    inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
    into a toil?
    into England.
    insert in't, could you not?
    is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
    is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
    it. Adieu.
    i' th' university, you say?
    it is but a shadow's shadow.
    it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
    it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
    it not?
    it means, say you this:
    journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
    keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
    kill'd me.
    kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes;
    king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
    kissing carrion- Have you a daughter?
    knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
    know a hawk from a handsaw.
    know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
    know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
    ladies. Good night, good night.                         Exit
    ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last by the
    laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
    last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
    leaves him. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes
    letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of  
    life,
    lips that I have kiss'd I know not how oft. Where be your gibes
    light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
    love passing well.
    lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis
    liquor.
    little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
    lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,  
    lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
    make you at Elsinore?
    man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    make you ready.
    man is twice a child.
    married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
    march. [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
    master's daughter.
    me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
    memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
    me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.  
    might it not?
    me, whether you were sent for or no.  
    mind.
    monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
    more, ha?
    mine.
    mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
    my leave of you.
    musty.
    needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what
    more than their even-Christen. Come, my spade! There is no
    neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
    my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you  
    neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
    nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,  
    much approve me. Well, sir?  
    newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
    not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
    not.
    nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
    not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
    not off.
    not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
    nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.
    not so wildly from my affair.
    not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
    not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as I
    now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that
    obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
    occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
    o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I
    of a king?
    of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
    of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
    of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for
    of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
    of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
    of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
    of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
    one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
    on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
    only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and
    on't.
    or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
    or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
    passionate action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes,
    players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
    pick'd out of ten thousand.
    piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in
    pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd  
      phrase.
    own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
    philosophy could find it out.
    pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
    plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
    pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
    plunge him into far more choler.
    pound! Didst perceive?
    pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I
    prais'd my Lord Such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
    pray You Pass with your best violence;
    promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.
    purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
    purpose, confess thyself-
    put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
    question next, say 'a grave-maker.' The houses he makes lasts
    question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
    question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe
    rawer breath
    reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
    read, my lord?
    receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
    remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
    repair hither and say you are not fit.
    reputation and profit, was better both ways.
    say-
    roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
    scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
    scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
    seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
    seeks her own salvation?
    seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
    sense.
    sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
    servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most
    set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said
    shall be the end of my business.
    shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
    shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose  
    shame and the odd hits.
    shipwright, or the carpenter?
    shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
    should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.  
    should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
    show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
    shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
    sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse
    sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
    sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it
    sir,- it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England- if
    slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I
    skull, the King's jester.
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
    stopping a bunghole?
    soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
    spent.
    speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and
    strumpet. What news ?
    speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be play'd on than a
    spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
    strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of Nature's
    suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten
    sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't
    take longer time.
    target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
    taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
    tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
    tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
    tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
    tell me one thing.
    temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
    that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
    tenants.
    the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
    the King.
    the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
    the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
    the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
    thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course
    the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    the guts of a beggar.
    them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou
    themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
    them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
    them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
    the only men.
    the players ready.
    the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
    the puppets dallying.
    the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
    there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
    there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
    there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
    the stair, into the lobby.
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    they?
    they are. To a nunnery, go.                            Exit.
    they'll tell all.
    think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.
    this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have
    those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
    thirty years.
    this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
    through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
    thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
    thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
    till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
    top of my bent.- I will come by-and-by.
    to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
    to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a
    tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
    tragedians of the city.
    'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,
    tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
    twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
    trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
    translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
    tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene  
    true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
    uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, you are
    unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
    valanc'd since I saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
    very liberal conceit.
    very day that young Hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
    very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
    vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be
    visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
    was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
    wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't! it hath made
    we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar
    were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
    went to cuffs in the question.
    what is't to leave betimes? Let be.
    what part a gentleman would see.
    waterfly?
    where my abridgment comes.
    well.- Welcome, good friends.- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is
    when I shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
    which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent God,
    which was the model of that Danish seal;
    while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
    whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
    will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
    willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
    will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
    will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
    will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
    within 's two hours.
    work; but what o' that? Your Majesty, and we that have free
    with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I
    world.
    would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
    would perhaps trouble a woman.
    would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
    would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
    you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
    you cannot play upon me.
    yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
    you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
    you nine year.
    you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
    your bounty. Take them in.
    your friend.
    your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
    your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.
    your table!
    yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
    your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
    your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien
------------------------------begin string reverse comporator sort----------------------------

















































































  





  



















































  




































  
































































































  





















Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene II.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene III.
Scene VII.
THE END
Scene VI.
  Pol. With what, i' th' name of God I
    How much I had to do to calm his rage I
  Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge I
    slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I
ACT III. Scene I.
Act II. Scene I.
ACT I. Scene I.
ACT IV. Scene I.
ACT V. Scene I.
  Ham.   A whole one I!
    reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
    with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I
  Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I  
    O what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
  Ham. Who, I?
    boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so I
    not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as I
    pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I
  Hor. That can I.
    Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
    them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I
    Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
    As I do thee. Something too much of this I
  Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I  
    Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
  Pol. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
    Yet I,
    o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I
  Guil. But these cannot I command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
                                                          HAMLET.'
                                                     'HAMLET.'
  Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly I
  Ham. No, not I!
    My lord, not I.
  Oph. You must sing 'A-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.' O,
    O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I
THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
Scene IV.
                            'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'
Scene V.
Scene V.
    For Hecuba!
    Hecuba.
    What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
    of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    That looks so many fadoms to the sea
  Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
    chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
    purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
  Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
    more, ha?
    As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
Enter Laertes and Ophelia.
      Ophelia,'-
    In hugger-mugger to inter him; Poor Ophelia
  Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
                      Enter Ophelia.  
                       Enter Ophelia.
  Ham. What, the fair Ophelia?
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    Affront Ophelia.  
  Queen. Nay, but Ophelia-
    Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
    Sprung from neglected love.- How now, Ophelia?
  Queen. How now, Ophelia?
  King. Pretty Ophelia!
  Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
    obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
  Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
    speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be play'd on than a
  Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a
  Ham. [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
    anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a
  Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
    And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
    to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a
    whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
    Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
    Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
    'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
    To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
    (for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
  Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
    Come, some music!
  Pol. And let him ply his music.
    lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,  
  Ham. No, by this bad.  
  King. Dead.
    Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
      A second time I kill my husband dead
    We should profane the service of the dead
    That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
    But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;
  Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
      But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
           No, no, he is dead;  
  Ber. In the same figure, like the King that's dead.  
    The source of this our watch, and the chief head
    T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
  Ham. [draws] How now? a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
  Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.  
    bonnet to his right use. 'Tis for the head.
    Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
    Than Young Laertes, in a riotous head,
      With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
    He took my father grossly, full of bread,
      Which was declining on the milky head
    With all my imperfections on my head.
    And at our more consider'd time we'll read,  
  Pol. That hath made him mad.
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
  Queen. Alas, he's mad!
  Ham. How came he mad?
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    And therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
    I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
    What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
    Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
      'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
    Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
    To be commanded.
    Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed;
    I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
    Good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
  Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
      When second husband kisses me in bed.
  Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
    Will sate itself in a celestial bed
  Mar. It is offended.
              An thou hadst not come to my bed.'
    In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
    If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
  Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
           Go to thy deathbed;
    Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    Stick fiery off indeed.
    But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
    Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
  Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
  Pol. This business is well ended.
  Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
    But wilt thou bear me how I did proceed?
  Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
  Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
    A combination and a form indeed
    As false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
  Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
    To show yourself your father's son in deed
   You say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.
  Queen. So he does indeed.
  King. O heavy deed!
    That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
    Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
    To keep it from divulging, let it feed
  King. She sounds to see them bleed.
    And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed  
  Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
    Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
    enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died,
    For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
    To the unsatisfied.
    I did repel his letters and denied
    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
  King. 'Tis Hamlet's character. 'Naked!'
    Her mood will needs be pitied.
    Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
    Be all my sins rememb'red.
    Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
  Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
  Ham. Pale or red?
    hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    When he th' ambitious Norway combated.
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
    journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
                 Enter Ophelia distracted.
  Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
  Oph. O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
      Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
      With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
    Which now goes too free-footed.
    The memory be green, and that it us befitted
  Oph. I was the more deceived.
      So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
    Or like a creature native and indued
  Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
      Repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
    Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
    She should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd
    Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,
    Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
    'Tis heavy with him; and am I then reveng'd,
              You promis'd me to wed.'
    by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
  Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd
  Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
  Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
    Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd
    And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
    I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
            Let in the maid, that out a maid
    And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd
    set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said
    You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said.
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
    Are burnt and purg'd away. But that I am forbid  
  Hor. My lord, I did;
    Come short of what he did.
  Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
    In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
  Ham. O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd.
    Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
         Now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
  Oph. 'Tis in my memory lock'd,
  Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd
    Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
    man is twice a child.
    Unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
  Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
    So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
    In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
    But if't be he I mean, he's very wild
    Nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
  Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
    To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd  
    To mine own room again; making so bold  
  Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
  Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
    A little month, or ere those shoes were old
    Should have a back or second, that might hold
    I do not know from what part of the world
    To what I shall unfold.
    An understanding simple and unschool'd;
  Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold
    And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
    world.
  Laer. My will, not all the world!
    And let me speak to the yet unknowing world
    In the corrupted currents of this world
    Seem to me all the uses of this world!
    No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
  Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
    That treason can but peep to what it would,
  Laer. My lord, I will be rul'd;
    As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'
    would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
  Hor. You might have rhym'd.
    But let this same be presently perform'd,
    And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
    The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
  Laer. Know you the hand?
    But to recover of us, by strong hand
    a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
    If by direct or by collateral hand
    Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
    Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
    The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
    So nightly toils the subject of the land,
  Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
         And hath shipped me intil the land,
  Hor. It must be shortly known to him from England
    I cannot live to hear the news from England,
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
    Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
    into England.
  Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?
    For England.
  Ham. For England?
    one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
  Capt. Against some part of Poland.  
    The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;  
  Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England!
    have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
    You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
  Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
    Th' important acting of your dread command?
  Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
    An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
    Put your dread pleasures more into command
    I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
  Ham. O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
    (O royal knavery!), an exact command,
    only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and
    pick'd out of ten thousand.
  Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and
  Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand  
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
  Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
    speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and
    Conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
  Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
  Rey. At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and  
    end.
    full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
    No more; and by a sleep to say we end
    died. They say he made a good end.
      For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
    And You must put me in your heart for friend,
    your friend.
    And each particular hair to stand an end
    Perpend.
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send
    As make your bouts more violent to that end-
      And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
  Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
  Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
    Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.  
  Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
    And carriage of the article design'd,
    And for his death no wind
      Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
      Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
    Never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
    And, like a man to double business bound,
    And so am I reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
  Laer. Upon my life, Lamound.
    Take these again; for to the noble mind
    Are joyfully return'd.
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
  Ham. [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!
    The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
    Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
    Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
    To hear him so inclin'd.
    Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
    To quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
    As it hath us'd to do- that I have found  
    If circumstances lead me, I will find
    Was gaged by our king; which had return'd
    He rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
    I must be cruel, only to be kind;
    Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
    But better look'd into, he truly found
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    King. Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
  King. Love? his affections do not that way tend;  
  King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd
    lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
    mind.
      And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
    He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
    And with his head over his shoulder turn'd
    It waves you to a more removed ground.
    choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
    We go to gain a little patch of ground
    Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
  Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
  Hor. Friends to this ground.
  Ham. Upon what ground?
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
    Your party in converse, him you would sound,
  Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
  Ham. O God!
  Laer. Do you see this, O God?
    His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
    which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent God,
  Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god  
  Ham. Good.  
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
    That to the use of actions fair and good
  Pol. Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
  Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
    My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good
    A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
    Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
  Pol. That's good! 'Mobled queen' is good.
    It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
    No medicine in the world can do thee good.
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
    Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
    Will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood
    Excitements of my reason and my blood,
      So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
    O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
    Repast them with my blood.
  Ham. [aside] Wormwood, wormwood!
      Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard
    Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
    Never to speak of this that you have heard:
    Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
         Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd  
    His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
    As did that one; and that, in my regard,
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
    Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
  Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
  King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
    Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
  Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
  Ber. Have you had quiet guard?
    should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.  
Elsinore. A churchyard.
    A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?
    That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,
    To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
    A sable silver'd.
  Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.  
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
                            Enter a Lord.
                                                    [Exit Lord.]
  Laer. My dread lord,
  Mar. My good lord!
  1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.
  Rey. But, my good lord-
  Osr. Ay, my good lord.
  Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
  Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
  Guil. My honour'd lord!
    I'll blessing beg of you.- For this same lord,  
    O'erbears Your offices. The rabble call him lord;
  Ros. My most dear lord!
  Hor. O, my dear lord!
  Guil. In what, my dear lord?
  Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!
  Oph. My lord?
  Mar. Nor I, my lord.
  Pol. Not I, my lord.
    read, my lord?
  Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
  Both. Arm'd, my lord.
  Ros. To what end, my lord?
  Oph. Good my lord,
  Ros. Good my lord!
  Hor. Ay, good my lord.
  Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
  Hor. Nay, good my lord -
  Hor. (within) My lord, my lord!
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
  Rey. Very good, my lord.
  Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
  Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
  Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
  Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?
  Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
    There, my lord.
  Laer. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
  Pol. That's very true, my lord.
  Pol. Do you know me, my lord?
  Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
  Oph. At home, my lord.
  Hor. O, where, my lord?
  Pol. I have, my lord.
  Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord.
  Mess. Save Yourself, my lord:
  Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
  Guil. A thing, my lord?
  Rey. As gaming, my lord.
  Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
  Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.  
  Rey. I shall, my lord.
  Ros. We shall, my lord.
  Hor. Well, my lord.
  Rey. Well, my lord.
  Ham. Very well, my lord.
  Pol. Fare you well, my lord.
  Hor. Very well, my lord.
  Rey. I will, my lord.
  Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.  
    What does this mean, my lord?
  Pol. What follows then, my lord?
  Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.  
  Ros. Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
  Guil. Prison, my lord?  
  Oph. No, my lord.
  Both [Mar. and Ber.] We do, my lord.
  Mar. You shall not go, my lord.
  Ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
  Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
  Hor. E'en so, my lord.
  Ros. We think not so, my lord.
  King. Thanks, dear my lord.
  Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
  Ros. Neither, my lord.
  Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
  Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
  Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
   Will You walk out of the air, my lord?
  Queen. How fares my lord?
  Laer. What out of this, my lord?
  Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
  Hor. It might, my lord.
  Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
    The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.
  Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
  Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
  Guil. What, my lord?
  Laer. What part is that, my lord?
  Oph. What is, my lord?
  Hor. Remember it, my lord!
  Pol. Honest, my lord?
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
  Hor. What news, my lord?
  Hor. What's that, my lord?
  Oph. What means this, my lord?
  Hor. Do not, my lord!
  Capt. I will do't, my lord.
  Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Laer. Ay my lord,
  Hor. Ay, my lord.
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  Rey. Ay, my lord,
  Guil. What should we say, my lord?
  Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
  Oph. You are merry, my lord.
  Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.
    Than is my deed to my most painted word.
      Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
    The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
      With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
      But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword  
      Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo! his sword,
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear by his sword.
    And lay your hands again upon my sword.
  Ham. Upon my sword.
    And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
    Swear by my sword.
    Swear by my sword.
    I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
    So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
  Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
  King. Part them! They are incens'd.
    Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
    The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd  
    As had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd
    Too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
    The ratifiers and props of every word,
    When that her golden couplets are disclos'd,  
    And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
    That cannot be; since I am still possess'd
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    By desperate appliance are reliev'd,
    It was against your Highness; whereat griev'd,
    and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
    My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
    But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
  Laer. He is justly serv'd.
    Which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
    Not shriving time allow'd.
    city? Are they so follow'd?
    Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd  
  Ham. Safely stow'd.
    fortunes turn Turk with me-with two Provincial roses on my raz'd
  Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
  Ber. He.
    Horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
    Resembles that it was. What it should be,
  Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
    Till then in patience our proceeding be.
Dramatis Personae
    To exploit now ripe in my device,
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practice  
    Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
    As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
    This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
  Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
    Your leave and favour to return to France;
    A sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
      But fill unshaken when they mellow be.
    You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
    I have a voice and precedent of peace
    There falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
    So, by my former lecture and advice,
    My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
    A double blessing is a double grace;
    O, vengeance!
    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
    Get you a place.
    He falls to such perusal of my face
    Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
    Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
    Unto that element; but long it could not be
    Unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice
    'Swounds, I should take it! for it cannot be
    Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
    it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
    Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
    Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
    As he in his particular act and place
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
            Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
    On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
    But this eternal blazon must not be
    A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
  Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
  Ham. Then saw you not his face?
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
    But it reserv'd some quantity of choice
  Ham. I'll be your foil, Laertes. In mine ignorance
    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
    And that our drift look through our bad performance.
    Break we our watch up; and by my advice  
    the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
    As fits a king's remembrance.
  Queen. If it be,
    To fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
    vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be
    what is't to leave betimes? Let be.
    Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
    You do remember all the circumstance?
    One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
    Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
  King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
    More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
    On such regards of safety and allowance
    grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
    It will be laid to us, whose providence
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    For art and exercise in your defence,
    defence?
    May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    For that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence
  Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    And with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
    How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
    And call the noblest to the audience.
  Laer. [aside] And yet it is almost against my conscience.
    Sir, in this audience,
  Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
    We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
    To offer it the show of violence;
    Nor shall you do my ear that violence
    pray You Pass with your best violence;
    Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
    He closes with you in this consequence:
    That so his sickness, age, and impotence
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
    It shall as level to your judgment pierce
    And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
    [Sings] O, a pit of clay for to be made
  Ham. How long is that since?
    but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
         O, a Pit of clay for to be made  
    To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
  Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
    Importing health and graveness. Two months since
  Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.
  Ham. No, nor mine now. [To Polonius] My lord, you play'd once
      The instant burst of clamour that she made
    Led by a delicate and tender prince,
    wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't! it hath made
         A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
    The lists, and full proportions are all made
    Till of this flat a mountain you have made
    And recks not his own rede.
  Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
    Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
    Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
  Guil. We will ourselves provide.
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
      Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
    All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
    Why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, Gertrude.
  King. Let's follow, Gertrude.  
    He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
    Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee
    A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
    I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee
    Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
    And you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
    Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
    Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
  Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
    Why seems it so particular with thee?
    For what advancement may I hope from thee,  
    But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
    Go on. I'll follow thee.
    I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow thee.
    And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
    you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
    O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
    Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
    work; but what o' that? Your Majesty, and we that have free
      Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,  
  Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
    T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
    And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
    For by the image of my cause I see
  Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see
    To keep those many many bodies safe
  Hor. What is it you will see?
    That makes calamity of so long life.
    An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
    If this did blast in proof. Soft! let me see.
    life,
    In thee there is not half an hour of life.
    what part a gentleman would see.
    your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
    Upon whose property and most dear life
    guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.  
    Thrown out his angle for my Proper life,
    yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
  Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life
    Pursued my life.
    Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
    Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
    With, hoo! such bugs and goblins in my life-
    To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
      If, once a widow, ever I be wife!
      Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
    shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
    You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
    And prey on garbage.
    Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
    Stood challenger on mount of all the age
    With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
    I hop'd thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
    His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
    When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
    'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
    When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?  
    He hath not fail'd to pester us with message
    To have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
    By heaven, it is as proper to our age
    You cannot call it love; for at your age
    Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
    Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
                 Ghost cries under the stage.
    Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.
  King. Arm you, I pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
    The triumph of his pledge.
    Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
    And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
  Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
    We may of their encounter frankly judge
  Pol. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
    The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
    Of the unworthiest siege.
      That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
    Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
    'Tis strange.
  Hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
      This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
  Ham. 'Tis very strange.
  Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
    bellow for revenge.
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in Your revenge
    Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
    May sweep to my revenge.
    Witness this army of such mass and charge,
  Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
    When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
    And many such-like as's of great charge,
    he.
  Pol. What said he?
    earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
  Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,
  King. But how hath she
  King. But where is he?
    Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
    carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts; she
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
    action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the
    and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
             [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
    thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
  Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
  Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
  Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
  Ham. Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the
    temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
    put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
  Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
  Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
  Ham. 'The Mousetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
    is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
  Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
    when I shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
    ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last by the
    seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
    of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
    Hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
    Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
    And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
    With arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
    article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
    him and my daughter.- My honourable lord, I will most humbly take
    Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake
    These hands are not more like.
    When he himself might his quietus make
    That thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
    tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
  Queen. it may be, very like.
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
  King. The doors are broke.
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,  
  Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
  Pol. Very like a whale.
  Ber. How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.
    The need we have to use you did provoke
  Ham. Or like a whale.
    For it is as the air, invulnerable,
  Hor. Nay, very pale.
    'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'
  King. As of a man faithful and honourable.
    Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
    How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
    your table!
  King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
  Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
  Ham. Is't possible?
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
  Hor. Is't possible?
         Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
    My uncle?
    Would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;  
  Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.  
    I had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
    Woo't drink up esill? eat a crocodile?
    King. 'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
    Depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
  Ber. Sit down awhile,
  Hor. Season your admiration for a while
    As to expend your time with us awhile
  Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.
    Absent thee from felicity awhile,
  Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
      My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
    Ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
    Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
    stopping a bunghole?
    In equal scale weighing delight and dole,
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole
    Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
    That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
    Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.
Elsinore. The platform before the Castle.
Elsinore. A passage in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. hall in the Castle.
Elsinore. A hall in the Castle.
A room in the Castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
    Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
    And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame  
    That for a fantasy and trick of fame
    And set a double varnish on the fame
    They shall go far with little.  
    A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
  Pol. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
              Alack, and fie for shame!
              By Cock, they are to blame.
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
    O good Horatio, what a wounded name
    Transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name
    I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.  
    That hath in it no profit but the name.
    image of a murther done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
    Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
  King. The very same.
            Quoth she, 'Before you tumbled me,
    kill'd me.
    And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
    To reason most absurd, whose common theme
  Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
    (Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!
    me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.  
  Queen. O my son, what theme?  
    To speak of horrors- he comes before me.
    Can you advise me?
    Which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
    you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
  Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
  Pol. What do you think of me?
    I am afeard You make a wanton of me.
    I pray you go with me.
  Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
              All in the morning bedtime,
    To punish me with this, and this with me,
    Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
    For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
    My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    take longer time.
    To any pastime?
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
    To keep my name ungor'd. But till that time
    You must not take for fire. From this time
    If his chief good and market of his time
    But that I know love is begun by time,
  Ham. In happy time.
  Ghost. Mark me.
  Laer. It well appears. But tell me
    Who is't that can inform me?
  King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
    Would make them capable.- Do not look upon me,
    you cannot play upon me.
    And to the last bended their light on me.
    If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
    This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
    Come.
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    Rome-
  Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
    There with fantastic garlands did she come
    I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
    To let this canker of our nature come
  Ham. You are welcome.
  Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
    For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
    not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
  Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!
    church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
    Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come.
    That, if again this apparition come,
    Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
  Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
  Ghost. My hour is almost come,
    But come!
  Ham. He will stay till you come.
    For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
  Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.
    Will return'd shall know you are come home.
    Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
    To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
                 Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, [with some
    What thou hast said to me.
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    Speak to me.  
    Speak to me.
    Of his affection to me.
    Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
    His access to me.
    It is 'Adieu, adieu! Remember me.'  
  Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
    King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?
  Laer. Come, one for me.
    By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!-
  Ham. She well instructs me.
    Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
  Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
    And do't the speedier that you may direct me
  Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me
    pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
  King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
  Ham. Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?
    To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
  Queen. Have you forgot me?
    How all occasions do inform against me
    In noise so rude against me?
    But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
    Will you be rul'd by me?
  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Ham. One.
  Mar. And liegemen to the Dane.
    You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
  Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
    I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
    Have by the very cunning of the scene
    tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene  
    Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
    And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine-  
  King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
  King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
    I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
  Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
    mine.
    And I do think- or else this brain of mine
    I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
    To those of mine!
    I made to her in marriage, and to decline
    For my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
    The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
              To be your Valentine.
    Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
    Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
    ere you had done.
    Away! for everything is seal'd and done
  Laer. Must there no more be done?
  Priest. No more be done.
      Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
    If there be any good thing to be done,
  Ros. Then is the world one.
    And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
    With sore distraction. What I have done
    Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
  Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
    Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
    The bell then beating one-
              He is dead and gone;
    Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
    Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
    Now I am alone.  
  Mar. 'Tis gone!
    Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone  
    Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
           He is gone, he is gone,
    And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'
    To you alone.
    For nature crescent does not grow alone
  Other. Why, he had none.
    You are the most immediate to our throne,
           From another one?
    I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
              At his heels a stone.
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
    And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.'
    To you yourself, to us, to every one.  
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
      On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
    I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
    For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
    That swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
  Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
    I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe  
  Ham. From top to toe?
  Laer. O, treble woe
    These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
    To be contracted in one brow of woe,
    be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
    Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
    I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
  Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
    To business with the King, more than the scope
    freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
      To desperation turn my trust and hope,
    Could not so mope.
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
  Hor. Half a share.
by William Shakespeare
    uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, you are
    To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
    Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
      An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
    Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
  Hor. [aside] His purse is empty already. All's golden words are
    Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
    and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
    But to my mind, though I am native here  
  King. At supper? Where?
    Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
    Drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
    And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,  
  Ber. 'Tis here!
    Is it not monstrous that this player here,
  Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
  Hor. 'Tis here!
         Of Jove himself; and now reigns here
    That youth and observation copied there,
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    What, is Horatio there ?
  Ham. I would I had been there.
    It had been so with us, had we been there.
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
  Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
  Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
    To England send him; or confine him where
  Ber. Who's there.?
    What is the issue of the business there.  
  Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'A shall recover his wits there;
      Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
    That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
    Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
         To their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
          'Doubt thou the stars are fire;
  Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
    Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire,
    And gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
    Before You visit him, to make inquire
    As if it some impartment did desire
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
    It is most retrograde to our desire;
    Out of the shot and danger of desire.
    For every man hath business and desire,
  Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.  
         And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
              Never departed more.
    To keep itself from noyance; but much more
  Queen. No more!
    No more.
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
    would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
  Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
         'One fair daughter, and no more,
    eyes. Prithee no more!
  Queen. O, speak to me no more!
  Queen. O Hamlet, speak no more!
  Laer. Think it no more.
    Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
    Makes vow before his uncle never more
    And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
    Elsinore.
  Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
SCENE.- Elsinore.
    But what is your affair in Elsinore?
Near Elsinore.
    make you at Elsinore?
    Within the centre.
    The terms of our estate may not endure
    And pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
    You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
  Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
    Well may it sort that this portentous figure
  Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
  Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure.
    Have you so slander any moment leisure
    Exposing what is mortal and unsure
    Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
    'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,
    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
    Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
    Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
    Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
  Laer. I am satisfied in nature,
    So crimeful and so capital in nature,
    That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    A violet in the youth of primy nature,
  Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture?
    Among a mineral of metals base,
    Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
    We heard it all.- My lord, do as you please;
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
      phrase.
    They clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
    Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
    Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
  Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
    Last, and as such containing as all these,
    Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
    Our purpose may hold there.- But stay, what noise,
    Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    Through your dominions for this enterprise,
    For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
    When it prov'd otherwise.?
      be otherwise.
    (As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
    sense.
    true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
  Laer. What ceremony else?
    As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
  Laer. What ceremony else?
    Or but a sickly part of one true sense
  Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
    half a year. But, by'r Lady, he must build churches then; or else
    As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
    Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
    As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
    Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
    That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
    Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
    in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those
    shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose  
    end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
    And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
      The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
    Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
      What to ourselves in passion we propose,
    How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
    In obstinate condolement is a course
    Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
    And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
    Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
         When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
    brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,
  Oph. Still better, and worse.
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
    thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course
    And with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
    Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
    Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
    For this effect defective comes by cause.
    I had my father's signet in my purse,
    Of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
    Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,  
  Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
    What, have you given him any hard words of late?
      But woe is me! you are so sick of late,
    Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
  Ham. The King doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
    'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
    To tell the secrets of my prison house,
    That your good beauties be the happy cause
    Set your entreatments at a higher rate
    My liege, and madam, to expostulate
    There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
    sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse
  King. [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
    If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
    And our affairs from England come too late.  
    Let me be no assistant for a state,  
    That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
    The safety and health of this whole state,
    Fordo it own life. 'Twas of some estate.
    Of his true state.
      So far from cheer and from your former state.
    Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
    Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
    The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
    Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
    This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
    As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
    As of a father; for let the world take note
    As it doth well appear unto our state,
    Th' effect of what I wrote?
    That else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
    Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
    What might be toward, that this sweaty haste  
    For the demand of our neglected tribute.
    The pith and marrow of our attribute.
    The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
  Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
  Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
    Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Give it an understanding but no tongue.
  Queen. What have I done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
    But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!
  King. [aside] O, 'tis too true!
    This above all- to thine own self be true,
                      Enter Prologue.
  Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;  
  Pol. 'Tis most true;
    By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?
    Collected from all simples that have virtue
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;  
    Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
    I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
  Laer. I pray you give me leave.
  Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
  Ham. So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
  Queen. What would she have?
  Rey. My lord, I have.
    first mouth'd, to be last Swallowed. When he needs what you have
    this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have
    And makes us rather bear those ills we have
    Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
    Who was in life a foolish peating knave.
    But he's an arrant knave.
                                                         grave.]
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
    To outface me with leaping in her grave?
                                             Leaps in the grave.
    Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
    Which we do tender as we dearly grieve
    reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe
  Ham. Into my grave?
    And not have strew'd thy grave.
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I believe
    pound! Didst perceive?
    those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
    They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
  Ham. Nay, but to live
    bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
    Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
  Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
    I could not but by her. The other motive
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
  Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
    Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
    Anon, as patient as the female dove
    Fare you well, my dove!
            But never doubt I love.
       To contract- O- the time for- a- my behove,
    I do receive your offer'd love like love,
       In youth when I did love, did love,
      Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
    There lives within the very flame of love
      Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
    As meditation or the thoughts of love,
    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
    Could not (with all their quantity of love)
    And with no less nobility of love
  Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love
    If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
    More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
    This mad young man. But so much was our love
    his love.
    Receiv'd his love?
  Ham. As woman's love.
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
  Pol. Mad for thy love?  
            Doubt that the sun doth move;
    Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
  Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
    Queen. The instances that second marriage move
    This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
      For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
    As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
    O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
  Guil. Faith, her privates we.
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe,
    Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
    He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
    With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
    As day does to your eye.
    Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
  Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye!
  Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
    I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze
    And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
    We shall express our duty in his eye;
  King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
  Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.  
    hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
  Ham. [comes forward] What is he whose grief  
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
         By his cockle bat and' staff
    The origin and commencement of his grief
  King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
    Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief;
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
    My head should be struck off.
                   A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
                 Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.
  Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
                                                   are shot off.  
    not off.
    If it be made of penetrable stuff;
    little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
    sir,- it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England- if
    And live the purer with the other half,
    Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
    So much from th' understanding of himself,
    The Devil himself.
  Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself
    It is a poison temper'd by himself.
    excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
    I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
  Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
  Pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.  
    Given private time to you, and you yourself
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    It sends some precious instance of itself
    With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
    Whose violent property fordoes itself  
  Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
    Being a thing immortal as itself?  
  Hor. As thou art to thyself.
    purpose, confess thyself-
    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
    Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
    Must render up myself.
    How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself
    Horatio!- or I do forget myself.
    That to Laertes I forgot myself,
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,-
    Behind the arras I'll convey myself
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
    know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
  Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
    fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
    altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a piece of
    his wife, Baptista. You shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of
    letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of  
    pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
    Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
  Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'A pour'd a flagon of
    But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
  Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
    Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murther of
    keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
    nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
    Than fly to others that we know not of?
    this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
    That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
            At his head a grass-green turf,
    Until my eyelids will no longer wag.
    That he could nothing do but wish and beg
    Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
    the King.
  Mar. Is it not like the King?
    Comes armed through our watch, so like the King
  Ber. Long live the King!
  Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
    There is a play to-night before the King.
  Ham. An earnest conjuration from the King,
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
    But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-
    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.
    Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hurts the King.
  Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
Enter King.
                    Enter King.
    Enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], King,
  Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
    Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing
    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
      Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
    neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
    Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
    What company, at what expense; and finding
    tell me one thing.
    More relative than this. The play's the thing
  Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
    The King is a thing-
    Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?  
  Ham. Nothing.
      Did nothing.
  Ber. I have seen nothing.
    With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
    That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
    As one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
    roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
  Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing  
    There's such divinity doth hedge a king
    of a king?
  Queen. As kill a king?
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    grave-making?
    And can say nothing! No, not for a king,
    This man shall set me packing.
    They cry 'Choose we! Laertes shall be king!'
  For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
    As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
    That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
    O thou vile king,
    'Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!'
    That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
    In censure of his seeming.
  Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.  
  Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
  Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
  Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; I hear him coming.
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    When thou liest howling.
    Both to my God and to my gracious king;
  Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
    shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
  Rey. Good my lord!                                    [Going.]
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    His silence will sit drooping.
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
    The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
  Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
  Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
    light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
    Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
    Most generous, and free from all contriving,
    A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
  Fran. Not a mouse stirring.
    Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
    And sure I am two men there are not living
    The canker galls the infants of the spring
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing
    nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,  
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
    the puppets dallying.
    Therefore I have entreated him along,  
  Pol. This is too long.
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
  Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?  
  Ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
  Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
    Believe so much in him, that he is young,
    But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
    are unwrung.
    In going back to school in Wittenberg,
    I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
  Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
  Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
  Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
  Ham. Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
    will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
    And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
    Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
    taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
    assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French
    I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,
    plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-
    I'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
    [To Laertes] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
    his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which
  Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!
    Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
    If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
    I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
    (Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch
    And I with them the third night kept the watch;
           Hath clawed me in his clutch,
    With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
    A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
    You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
    Without the sensible and true avouch
  Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
           As if I had never been such.
    The chariest maid is prodigal enough
    form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
    That swift as quicksilverr it courses through
  Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
      Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
    For, though I am not splenitive and rash,
    And from her fair and unpolluted flesh  
    Sound a flourish. [Enter Trumpets and Kettledrums. Danish
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
    Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
    We'll put the matter to the present push.-
  Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
    Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
    It may be death.
    He should the bearers put to sudden death,
    Under the moon, can save the thing from death
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
    (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
    But that the dread of something after death-
    He never gave commandment for their death.
    O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
    That I am guiltless of your father's death,
    Which I have told thee, of my father's death.  
    Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
  King. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
    To muddy death.
    Is by a forged process of my death
    And hears it roar beneath.
    The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
  Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
  Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
    Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
    rawer breath
  Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath
    yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
    his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
    That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
  Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
  Hor. In faith,
  Mar. Nor I, my lord- in faith.
  Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
  Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
    tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
    better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with
    Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
    Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
    Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
    By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
    Here's to thy health.
  King. I do not fear it, I have seen you both;
    I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
    thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
    Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
  Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
    heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
  Ham. Dost thou think Alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
    Extorted treasure in the womb of earth
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
  Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
    'This must be so.' We pray you throw to earth
    Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
    For he himself is subject to his birth.
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
    Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
    The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
    Rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
    And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
  King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
    Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
    A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
    What is between you? Give me up the truth.
    Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
    O, speak!
    That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
    And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
  Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
    But from what cause he will by no means speak.
    For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
  Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
  Queen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
    To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,  
  Mar. No, it is struck.
      Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
    And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
      But what we do determine oft we break.
    And that his soul may be as damn'd and black
  Queen. Alack,
    So bloodily hast struck.
    and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
    So levied as before, against the Polack;
    Nor customary suits of solemn black,
    King. I do believe you think what now you speak;
  King. Why, now You speak
  Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
    If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
           A very, very- pajock.
    Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
    visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
    And with a larger tether may he walk
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
    And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
  Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
    As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
    I bought an unction of a mountebank,
    As level as the cannon to his blank,
    What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
  Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think,
    Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
    Your wisdom best shall think.
    breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
  King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
  Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,  
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    We will bestow ourselves.- [To Ophelia] Read on this book,
    If I had play'd the desk or table book,
                 Enter Hamlet, reading on a book.
  King. Gertrude, do not drink.
    The first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
  Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
    Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    A very noble youth. Mark.
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Couch we awhile, and mark.
    Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
    My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
  Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
  Claudius, King of Denmark.
    A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
  Oph. Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
  Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark
    From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
  Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
    And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
    for your succession in Denmark?
  Oph. Say you? Nay, pray You mark.
  Oph. Pray you mark.
      Aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
    What might you think? No, I went round to work
    Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
    air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
    And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
    How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
    Where every god did seem to set his seal
    As e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
    (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal
    Doth all the noble substance often dout To his own scandal.
    which was the model of that Danish seal;
    Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
    laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
    Of bell and burial.
    The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian burial.
    With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
    gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' Christian burial.
  Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
    His means of death, his obscure funeral-
  Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
    history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
    But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
    Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
    Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
  Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
      Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
    Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
    What's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
    That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
    Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
  Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
    And bear it to the chapel.
    With variable objects, shall expel
  Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
  Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
    was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
  Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;
    memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
    The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
    From that particular fault. The dram of e'il
    into a toil?
    When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
    Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil
    In further evil?
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    The Scripture says Adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll
    May fit us to our shape. If this should fall,
    not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
  Ber. Last night of all,
    To be forestalled ere we come to fall,  
    And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
      And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
    Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
    But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
    And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
    target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
    That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
  King. So you shall;
  Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall
    they'll tell all.
  Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
    His liberty is full of threats to all-
    The better to beguile. This is for all:
    do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
    Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
    Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,  
    And so, without more circumstance at all,
      (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
    Or not at all.
  Pol. Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
    And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
    What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
    As if he had been loosed out of hell
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
    Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
    Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
    O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
  Other. Marry, now I can tell!
    But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
  Other. Mass, I cannot tell.
    Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
    Farewell.
  Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
    And for my means, I'll husband them so well
  Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
  Pol. Farewell!
    love passing well.
  Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
  King. It likes us well;
    nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.
    I will bestow him, and will answer well
  King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
  Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
  Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
           The which he loved passing well.'
    for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.
  Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
  Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
    Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
    Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
    My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
  Ham. Thou pray'st not well.
  Pol. 'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.
  Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.
  Ham. I am glad to see you well.
    I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.
  Queen. Did he receive you well?
  King. Let him demand his fill.
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
    New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
    We must with all our majesty and skill
    have not the skill.
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
  Ham. It waves me still.
    Let it be tenable in your silence still;
    And nothing is at a like goodness still;
  Ham. I will.
  Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
    To show us so much gentry and good will
  Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
    No traveller returns- puzzles the will,
  Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
    Rough-hew them how we will-
  All. We will, we will!
    Though inclination be as sharp as will.
  Hor. I warr'nt it will.
  Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
    fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
    And reason panders will.
    of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
    Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
    And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
    know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
         All flaxen was his poll.
    That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
    Of unimproved mettle hot and full,  
    Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
                                            [Throws up a skull.]
                                      Throws up [another skull].
                                          [Puts down the skull.]
  Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
    Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.  
  Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
    And my imaginations are as foul
    As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;
  Mar. O, wonderful!
  Ham. O my prophetic soul!
    The inward service of the mind and soul
    She's so conjunctive to my life and soul
    When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
    And we shall jointly labour with your soul
    O, step between her and her fighting soul
    Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
    Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
    To take him in the purging of his soul,
    Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
    Even with the very comment of thy soul
  Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
  Ham. Good madam!
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
    the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
         God 'a'mercy on his soul!
    I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
  Laer. The devil take thy soul!
      Now falls on Priam.
    'That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
    This sudden sending him away must seem
    entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
    You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
    And not where I had aim'd them.
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
    speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
    I pray you, now receive them.
    They were given me by Claudio; he receiv'd them
    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
    help to hasten them?
    That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
    Of him that brought them.
    are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
  King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
    (For so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
    And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
    We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
    This night to play before him.
  Hor. I did very well note him.
  Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
  Hor. Heaven secure him!
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
    That, being of so young clays brought up with him,
    No more to undertake it, I will work him
    We cannot get from him.  
    To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
    And will not let belief take hold of him
    That we with wisest sorrow think on him
    Did not together pluck such envy from him
    And thus a while the fit will work on him.
  Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
  Hor. A piece of him.
    Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
                                            [Grapples with him].
  Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
    Pray you be round with him.
    him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
    Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
    You must not put another scandal on him,
  King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
    Addicted so and so'; and there put on him
    Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
  Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
    Pleasant and helpful to him!
  Pol. At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
    Is the great love the general gender bear him,
      'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
  Queen. For love of God, forbear him!
    That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
    To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
  Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.
    Speak loudly for him.
  1. Play. 'Anon he finds him,
    Let his queen mother all alone entreat him  
at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].
  King. Well, we shall sift him.
  Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skull.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,  
    More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
  Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
  Queen. Did you assay him  
    I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
  Queen. But not by him!
    The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
    I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.-
  Mar. Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,
    And to the manner born, it is a custom
    To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
    A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
  Hor. Is it a custom?
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    In filial obligation for some term
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    And there assume some other, horrible form
    The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
    act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
  Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
      But, as we often see, against some storm,
      Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,
    escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
    honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
    the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
    So much as from occasion you may glean,  
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean  
    That I might be the organ.
    did the first murther! This might be the pate of a Politician,
    To give the world assurance of a man.
    And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
  Ham. As th'art a man,
  Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man.
  Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
    Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
    The unseen good old man.
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
  Other. Was he a gentleman?
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
    gentleman.'
  Ros. Most like a gentleman.
    But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
    He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman.
    Like a good child and a true gentleman.
    newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
  Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
  Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
    Speak, man.
    Holds such an enmity with blood of man
    would perhaps trouble a woman.
    is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
    Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-
  King. A Norman.
    To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
    O most pernicious woman!
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.
           And we cast away moan.
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
    Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
  Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
      About the world have times twelve thirties been,
    Hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
  Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
      And thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
    I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
    have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen
  Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.
    What we two nights have seen.
    Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
  Ham. How does the Queen?
    This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.
              Enter [two Players as] King and Queen.  
                           Enter Queen.
                                                   [Exit Queen.]
  Ham. 'The mobled queen'?
  1. Play. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'
    Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
    The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
    How now, sweet queen?
    And that your Grace hath screen'd and stood between
    My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
    When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,
    will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
  King. Will you know them then?
    carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.  
  Ham. What woman then?
      But if the gods themselves did see her then,
    O heavy burthen!
    Be you and I behind an arras then.
    your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien
    And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
  Queen. Ay, amen!
  Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
    The imminent death of twenty thousand men
  All. Gentlemen!
                                               Exeunt Gentlemen.
    Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
  Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
    The form of plausive manners, that these men
    Come hither, gentlemen,
  Ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
  Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!
    So oft it chances in particular men
    the only men.
    Unto our climature and countrymen.
    On plots and errors happen.
    Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
    suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten
  Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
    that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
    And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
    Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
      And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
    With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
      Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
    Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
    Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
    To heaven.
    Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
    Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
    And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
    As oft as any passion under heaven
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
    Unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
  Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!
    But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
    Will nothing stick Our person to arraign
    again.
    I shall not look upon his like again.
         He never will come again.
    That he which hath your noble father slain
  Pol. [behind] O, I am slain!
    Now fear I this will give it start again;
    And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
  Polonius, Lord Chamberlain.
    Would have reverted to my bow again,
    Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
  Mar. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
         And will he not come again?
    O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
    Perchance 'twill walk again.
  Laer. Well, again!
                      Enter Ghost again.
    But in battalions! First, her father slain;
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
         And will he not come again?
  Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
    With this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
    Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
  Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
  Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
    And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
  Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
    And we beseech you, bend you to remain
    Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,  
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
                                   Exeunt [all but the Captain].
    Without more motive, into every brain
  A Norwegian Captain.
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain
  Hor. That is most certain.
    Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
  Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
      And never come mischance between us twain!
  Ham. Up from my cabin,
    receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
    his authorities. But such officers do the King best service in
  Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
    faculties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in
    valanc'd since I saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
    To his confine; and of the truth herein
  All. No, let's come in!
                              A noise within: 'Let her come in.'
  Hor. Let them come in.
  Queen. Let her come in.  
    piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in
    twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
    especially where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it live in
    'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin.
    And, as the world were now but to begin,
    I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
    Is very cunning in.
                  [Exit the Queen. Then] Exit Hamlet, tugging in
                                                 A noise within.
    Since nature cannot choose his origin,-
    Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
    Give, me superfluous death.                  A noise within.
               [Drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].
                                                 [March within.]
    Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
    To tell my story.         [March afar off, and shot within.]
  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
  Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
    your bounty. Take them in.
  King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
  Ham. I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in
    And after we will both our judgments join
  Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into France I have been in
  Ham. My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in
    honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
    Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
    How now O What hath befall'n?
    Such was the very armour he had on
  King. Our son shall win.
    And he not from his reason fall'n thereon
    And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
    Give us the foils. Come on.
    I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
    And prologue to the omen coming on,
    In honourable fashion.
    A scullion!  
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
  Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
    Into a tow'ring passion.
    But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
    against their own succession.
    Had he the motive and the cue for passion
    hold up Adam's profession.
    Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
    When we would bring him on to some confession
    I'll cross it, though it blast me.- Stay illusion!
    This present object made probation.
    That flesh is heir to. 'Tis a consummation  
  Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
    And gem of all the nation.
    I have in quick determination
    To show my duty in your coronation,  
    If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
  Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
    amazement and admiration.
    The very place puts toys of desperation,
    No noble rite nor formal ostentation,-
    him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
    innovation.
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
  Mar. Look with what courteous action
    seeks her own salvation?
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    And keep you in the rear of your affection,  
    Why should we in our peevish opposition
    And could of men distinguish, her election
  Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
    According to the phrase or the addition
     discretion.
  Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
  Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.
    Shall in the general censure take corruption
    That might your nature, honour, and exception
    So horridly to shake our disposition
    went to cuffs in the question.
    By this encompassment and drift of question
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
    That I must call't in question.
    And thus the native hue of resolution
    about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
  Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
    For what we know must be, and is as common
  Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
    And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
           And his sandal shoon.
    To put an antic disposition on),  
    Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
    Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
  Ham. 'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.-
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
    That capability and godlike reason
    (O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
    If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
  Ham. What's his weapon?
    My custom always of the afternoon,
  Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
    Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
    Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
    fay, I cannot reason.
  Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
  All. Treason! treason!
    demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
    Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
    or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
  Ham. Denmark's a prison.
    Than that which dearest father bears his son
    On Fortune's cap we are not the very button.
  Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard.- Prithee say on.
    deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison
    Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.-
    You laying these slight sullies on my son
    For he was likely, had he been put on,
    Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
    But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-
    Where is your son?
  Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
    Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.  
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
               Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                    Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  For. Go softly on.
             Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  King. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                            [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
                          Exeunt [Rosencrantz and Guildenstern].
            Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
                          [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern]
  King. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
    Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!
    Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    The undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
    occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
    himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
    your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
            'So would I 'a' done, by yonder sun,
      But, orderly to end where I begun,  
      Our wills and fates do so contrary run
    And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
  Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
    They had begun the play. I sat me down;
Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down
    Th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
  Hor. Well, sit we down,
  Lord. The King and Queen and all are coming down.
    And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
    And break your own neck down.
    My tables! Meet it is I set it down
    As therein are set down.
    Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! sit you down
                Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.
    With an entreaty, herein further shown,
                                            [Exit Second Clown.]  
    Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
    As are companions noted and most known
    Now wears his crown.
  Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own
    As if increase of appetite had grown
    Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
  Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
      That our devices still are overthrown;
      Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
    and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go  
    No.
    desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own  
  Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
  Laer. No.
  Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
  Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
    And in part him.' Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.
  Queen. What shall I do?
    Say, why is this? wherefore? What should we do?
    Dies in his own too-much. That we would do,
    That he should weep for her? What would he do,
                                                  Exit Reynaldo.
    If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
      My operant powers their functions leave to do.
    My stern effects. Then what I have to do
    That you know aught of me- this is not to do,
    And let them know both what we mean to do
    Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,'
  Mar. Holla, Bernardo!
          Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.
  Fran. Bernardo?
    players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
    He may not, as unvalued persons do,
    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    Do not as some ungracious pastors do,
  Ham. 'Swounds, show me what thou't do.
  Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
    Gonzago'?
  Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's Gonzago.  
    O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
    And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
    I do beseech you give him leave to go.
    As infinite as man may undergo-  
    But let that go.
         Which bewept to the grave did not go
  Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
    Why to a public count I might not go
    O, ho!
  Osr. Look to the Queen there, ho!
    Help, help, ho!
  Lord. My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who
  Ham. Between who?
    tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
  Ham. Saw? who?
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.
                              Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio.
    Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio
    And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
    favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio,
  Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio.
  Ham. O, I die, Horatio!
    But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
  Ham. What, ho, Horatio!
                      Enter Horatio.
                                         [Retires with Horatio.]  
    There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
  Ber. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
  Mar. Question it, Horatio.
  Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
                                                 [Exit Horatio.]  
                                                   Exit Horatio.
    Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
  Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
  Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
    scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
    If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
  Ham. How if I answer no?
    me, whether you were sent for or no.  
    more than their even-Christen. Come, my spade! There is no
  Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
    discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no
  Ham. The point envenom'd too?
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.
  Hor. Let him bless thee too.
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
    Importing Denmark's health, and England's too,
    very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
  Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.
  King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;
    monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
    King. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
  Other. Why, 'tis found so.
  King. It shall be so.
  Laer. Let this be so.
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
    As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
  Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
  Hor. E'en so.
  Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
  Osr. Shall I redeliver you e'en so?
    Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?  
  Hor. 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.  
    mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
      And as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
    That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'
    promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.
    If damned custom have not braz'd it so
    I do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
    The rather, if you could devise it so
  Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
  Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
  Oph. No more but so?
    And let him know so.
    neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
  Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
  Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to
  Ber. It would be spoke to.
    My good friends, I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to
    He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
    will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
  Ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
    soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
  Other. Go to!
  Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
    brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
    bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
  Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
  Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
  Lord. The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
      'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to
  Both. We will, my lord.                       Exeunt they two.
  Ham. Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonius.] Will you two
    But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
  Ham. Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
  Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?
  Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    Devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
      The tedious day with sleep.
    And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
    To try conclusions, in the basket creep
    Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
         For some must watch, while some must sleep:
  Ham.   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
  Hor. Hail to your lordship!
  Oph. What means your lordship?
  Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
  Pol. [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
    For out o' doors he went without their help
    The bark is ready and the wind at help,
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
    No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
      Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
    Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
    Give him the cup.
    Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
    You mainly were stirr'd up.
    find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
    With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
  Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
      A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-  
    The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
    Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
  Ham. For God's love let me hear!
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
    How these things came about. So shall You hear
  Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
    Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
    And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
    Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
    Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
  Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
    For we will fetters put upon this fear,
    All given to mine ear.
    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
  Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
  Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.
    Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
    Swear.
    And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
      Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
  Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
  King. O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
    The glowworm shows the matin to be near
         And in his grave rain'd many a tear.
         For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
    Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
  Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
  Ghost. Swear.
    As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
    Consent to swear.
                                                   [They swear.]
    Drabbing. You may go so far.
    he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far
    the guts of a beggar.
    you nine year.
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
    we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar
          Doubt truth to be a liar;
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
    Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
    'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
    The soldiers' music and the rites of war
    And foreign mart for implements of war;
  Marcellus, Officer.
  Ham. I beseech you remember.
    Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
  Bernardo, officer.
  Marcellus, officer.
    That hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
  Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
    And what's untimely done. [So haply slander-]
      As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
  King. Pluck thein asunder.
    And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
    And, as I think, they have already order
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    You know the wager?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger.
    That we can let our beard be shook with danger,
    Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
  Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
    That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
                                                 Exit Messenger.
                     Enter a Messenger.
  Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
  Both. Longer, longer.
    This must not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,
  Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
    unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
    Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
  Queen. I will not speak with her.
  Queen. Came this from Hamlet to her?
    To sing a requiem and such rest to her
    But you must know, your father lost a father;
  Ghost of Hamlet's Father.
    father?
    Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
    entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
  King. Conceit upon her father.
    Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
    Requite him for your father.  
  King. Not that I think you did not love your father;
  Hor. My lord, the King your father.
    To give these mourning duties to your father;
    My father- methinks I see my father.
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
    My father's brother, but no more like my father
    The apparition comes. I knew your father.
    Play something like the murther of my father
    Give me my father!
  Ham. The King my father?
    would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
    Most throughly for my father.
    To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
  Laer. Where is my father?
    The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
    Nay, come, let's go together.  
    God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
  Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
    Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
  Clown. For none neither.
    hither?
    Why does the drum come hither?
    dare scarce come thither.
    Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
  Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
    For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
    Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,  
  Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    Of my true mother.
    Farewell, dear mother.
  Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!
    But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother
    He that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
    Good night, mother.
    And (would it were not so!) you are my mother.
    Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother!
    Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
  Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
  Ham. Why he more than another?
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.  
    And hurt my brother.
  Ham. Murther?
  Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
    May give his saying deed; which is no further
  King. How may we try it further?
    Of those effects for which I did the murther-
    Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murther'?
  Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
  Francisco, a soldier
         They bore him barefac'd on the bier
  Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
  Ham. 'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
    Or for some frontier?
    plunge him into far more choler.
  A Gentleman, courtier.
  Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
  Rosencrantz, courtier.
  Voltemand, courtier.
    his kibe.- How long hast thou been a grave-maker?
                 Enter young Osric, a courtier.
  Cornelius, courtier.
  Guildenstern, courtier.
  Osric, courtier.
    For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
  Ham. Hark you, Guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!
    And pious action we do sugar o'er  
    The head and source of all your son's distemper.
  Ham. At supper.
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
                                                [Gives a paper.]
    Of these dilated articles allow.            [Gives a paper.]
    That they do know my son, come you more nearer
    Winner and loser?
    Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
  Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
    kissing carrion- Have you a daughter?
    Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
  Oph. Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.  
    master's daughter.
  Pol. [aside] Still on my daughter.
    carpenter?
    shipwright, or the carpenter?
    on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
    skull, the King's jester.
    That I must be their scourge and minister.
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
    To hear and see the matter.
    How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
  Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter;
    What is the matter?
      And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
  Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
    I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.
    think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.
                                             [Reads] the letter.
    To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever  
    O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
  Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
    That I have longed long to re-deliver.
    Truly deliver.
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver
  Other. Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver!
    May be a devil; and the devil hath power
    Giving to you no further personal power
      In general synod take away her power;
    if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
  Mar. 'Tis gone and will not answer.
    My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
  Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
    while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
                                            [Exit First Player.]
  Osr. Sir?
  Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
    not so wildly from my affair.
  Ham. Are you fair?
    But soft! methinks I scent the morning air.
  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
    Devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
  Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
    But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
  Laer. You mock me, sir.
  Clown. Mine, sir.
    not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
  Guil. The King, sir-
  Ham. With drink, sir?
    much approve me. Well, sir?  
  Ham. Who commands them, sir?
  Clown. For no man, sir.
  Ham. Of him, sir.
  Ham. I am very glad to see you.- [To Bernardo] Good even, sir.-  
  Ham. Come on, sir.
  Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
    shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
  Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'Tis for
    Why the man dies.- I humbly thank you, sir.
  Ros. [to Polonius] God save you, sir!
    And all we mourn for.  
  Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
  Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
  Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
  Capt. They are of Norway, sir.
    of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for
    That thus he suffers for.
    Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor
  Sailor. God bless you, sir.
  Ham. Hear you, sir!
    Next, Your son gone, and he most violent author
    God bless you, sir!
  Guil. My lord, we were sent for.
  King. Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
    individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
    Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor  
              And dupp'd the chamber door,
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
  Pol. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
    Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
    liquor.
    Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
    trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
  Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
  Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.
    That show of such an exercise may colour
    And since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
    Of his behaviour.
    To my revenge. But in my terms of honour
    Till by some elder masters of known honour
    As it behooves my daughter and your honour.
  All. Our duty to your honour.  
  Player. I warrant your honour.
  Pol. Upon my honour-
    And in the porches of my ears did pour
  Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that our
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
  Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
  Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
    amble, and you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make your  
    were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
    [Reads]'High and Mighty,-You shall know I am set naked on your
  Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for your
    believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your
    convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your
  Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
  Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
    Denmark?- What, my young lady and mistress? By'r Lady, your
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
  Clown. 'Twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
    affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
  Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
    With windlasses and with assays of bias,
  King. Alas, alas!
    married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
    last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
    Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
    To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
  Capt. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
           This realm dismantled was  
                              [Polonius hides behind the arras.]
           'It came to pass, as most like it was.'
    Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
  Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?
      In Mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
                                                        [Reads.]
    But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
  Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.     [Reads.]  
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds
    Thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
    Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
    There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
    It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
      Unite comutual in most sacred bands.
      Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,
  Ham. Hold off your hands!
    A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
    Welcome, my good friends.
  Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
    And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
    O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,  
      As low as to the fiends!
    Importing the surrender of those lands
    question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
  Ham. 'By-and-by' is easily said.- Leave me, friends.
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
    Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
    Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
    There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
    Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
      And passion in the gods.'
      Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,  
    A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
  Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,  
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Lords.
    I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
    to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
    More than in words?
    Must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
  Ham. Words, words, words.
    Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
    Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
    Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
    Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places  
    lips that I have kiss'd I know not how oft. Where be your gibes
  Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices
  Ham. What call you the carriages?
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
    We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
    And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
                       carrying torches.
  Ham. A king of shreds and patches!-
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]
    Which have solicited- the rest is silence.             Dies.
    Out of his lunacies.
    Nor thine on me!                                       Dies.
    Follow my mother.                                 King dies.
    Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
    Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
  Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
      The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
    There is no shuffling; there the action lies
      The poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies.
  Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,
  Laer. None but his enemies.
    Some little time; so by your companies
    there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
  Ros. Both your Majesties
    leaves him. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes
    And he beseech'd me to entreat your Majesties
    His further gait herein, in that the levies,
    The very soul, and sweet religion makes
    Soil our addition; and indeed it takes
    That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
    Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
    Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
  1. Play. 'Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
  Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [Aside] How pregnant sometimes
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
    Yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
    For in the fatness of these pursy times
    When I to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
    Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
    I stay too long. But here my father comes.
    where my abridgment comes.
  Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    But I will delve one yard below their mines
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
    If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
    His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
    Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
            Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
    Popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
  Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
    And for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
  Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
    strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of Nature's
  Oph. The King rises.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
  King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    As harbingers preceding still the fates
    I should have fatted all the region kites
    At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.        [Writes.]
    My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
    Of mighty opposites.
    and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
  King. O, he is mad, Laertes.
  King. Good Laertes,
Enter King and Laertes.
    So fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
    Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
  Queen. Calmly, good Laertes.
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
    What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
  King. What is the cause, Laertes,
    And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
  Osr. Of Laertes?
    And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
  King. If it be so, Laertes
    Hamlet the Dane.                    [Leaps in after Laertes.
                    change rapiers, [and Hamlet wounds Laertes].
  Ham. That is Laertes,
    You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes?
  Osr. How is't, Laertes?
    Into the madness wherein now he raves,
    Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
    passionate action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes,
  King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
    the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
    alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
    To the ambassadors of England gives
    Together with remembrance of ourselves.
    should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
  Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
    After the thing it loves.
Enter two Clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].
    In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
    Of mine own eyes.  
    have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
    He seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
    Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
    Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?  
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes
  Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
    kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes;
  Oph. (Sings)
  Clown. (Sings)
    To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
    And leads the will to desperate undertakings
    Richer than that which four successive kings
    Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
    We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
                       [Clown digs and] sings.
  Oph. (sings)
  Oph. (sings)
  Oph. (sings)
  Clown. (sings)
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
    lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis
    If with too credent ear you list his songs,
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
    well.- Welcome, good friends.- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is
  Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
  Pol. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
    [Aside] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
  Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
  Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
  Ham. This?
    how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
    scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
    him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
    If you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his  
  Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
    not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
    great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this
  Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] Take this from this, if this
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
  King. Let's further think of this,
    Now, out of this-
  Queen. To whom do you speak this?
    Your loneliness.- We are oft to blame in this,
    Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
  Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
    So excellent a king, that was to this
  Pol. Wherefore should you do this?
    Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
    Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
  Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
    chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
    Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
  Ham. But where was this?
    What warlike noise is this?
  Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
  Hor. Why, what a king is this!
    To tell us this.
    it means, say you this:
  King. Do you think 'tis this?
  Laer. Why ask you this?
  Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio] Dost know this
  King. What dost thou mean by this?  
Flourish. [Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, cum aliis.
    Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
  Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
    man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    Most holy and religious fear it is
    Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
  Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
    your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.
    comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
    Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's
    That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
    As from the body of contraction plucks  
         Old grandsire Priam seeks.'
    The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks
    With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
    Where should We have our thanks?
  Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
    Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
    Her father and myself (lawful espials)
    Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
  Queen. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.          Drinks.
    All may be well.                                  He kneels.
  Ham. Nay come! again!                         The Queen falls.  
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
                                                [Laertes falls.]
    of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
    Are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
      Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
    And in this brainish apprehension kills
  Ham. These tedious old fools!
    As to peace-parted souls.
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
    king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
  Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
    Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
  Clown. 'A was the first that ever bore arms.
                                               Spreads his arms.
  Laer. To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
    A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
    Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
    Weigh what convenience both of time and means
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means
  Hor. No, by no means!
    themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
    show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
    Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
    Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
  Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
    Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
    Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
    Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
  Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
      About her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
  Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
  Pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
    To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
  Fort. Let four captains
    Makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
Elsinore. The Castle. Another part of the fortifications.
    Is the main motive of our preparations,
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
                                                [Ghost beckons.]  
    Larded with many several sorts of reasons,
  King. O, for two special reasons,
    The insolence of office, and the spurns
    the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
  Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
    The fair Ophelia!- Nymph, in thy orisons
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
    T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
                                                    [He] sleeps.
         But age with his stealing steps
    discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
    But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
    In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
    These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
  Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
    The very faculties of eyes and ears.
    Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
    And let us once again assail your ears,
                                   Pours the poison in his ears.
    That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
    equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years
    Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
    The light and careless livery that it wears
  Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
    That was and is the question of these wars.
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
    thirty years.
    you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
                     Enter the Players with recorders.  
  Two Clowns, gravediggers.
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
    Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
    souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.
                    Enter Laertes with others.
  Ham. I lov'd Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
    The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
    And his commission to employ those soldiers,
               Hautboys play. The dumb show enters.
  Ham. Do you think I meant country matters?
  Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
    He answers:
           Larded all with sweet flowers;
    But keep a farm and carters.
    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
                     Flourish for the Players.
    Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
                                             [Scatters flowers.]
           With true-love showers.
    As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
                 Enter a Messenger with letters.
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
  Players.
  Laer. I thank you. Keep the door.      [Exeunt his Followers.]
    With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players
                     Enter four or five Players.
                                                 Exeunt Players.
  Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
  Guil. There are the players.
    Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
  Pol. Come, sirs.
  English Ambassadors.
    Most welcome home!                       Exeunt Ambassadors.
  Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
                          Enter Sailors.
    To both your honours.
    favours?
    Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
  Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
    You go not till I set you up a glass
    The portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.
    within 's two hours.
  Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours
    Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
    That it might please you to give quiet pass
  Ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
    So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
    Without debatement further, more or less,
  Queen. This is mere madness;
    Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
    And I the matter will reword; which madness
    That I essentially am not in madness,
    Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
    And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
    And that shall lend a kind of easiness
    Answer, and think upon this business.
  Hor. Custom hath made it in him a Property of easiness.
    shall be the end of my business.
    She turns to favour and to prettiness.
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    It lifted up it head and did address
    Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
    Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
    Each toy seems Prologue to some great amiss.
    Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
    Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
  Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
    Why you proceeded not against these feats
    Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
  Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
    With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
         Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;  
                    [The King puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
              Attendants with foils and gauntlets.
    With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-
    And drive his purpose on to these delights.
    But I do prophesy th' election lights  
  All. Lights, lights, lights!
    remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
    And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
    Free me so far in your most generous thoughts  
  Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.  
  Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
    shame and the odd hits.
    That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
    As he is very potent with such spirits,
    But mere implorators of unholy suits,  
    O heavens! is't possible a young maid's wits
    But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
  Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
                  Colours, and Attendants.
                                                    Attendants].
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
                       Exeunt King and Queen, [with Attendants].
  King. Go seek him there. [To Attendants.]
        Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern [with Attendants].
  Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.
                                            [Exeunt Attendants.]
    tenants.
    Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    And even the like precurse of fierce events,
    Between the pass and fell incensed points
    seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
    And there I see such black and grained spots
    Wherein they say you shine, Your sun of parts
    Without the which we are Pictures or mere beasts;
    question next, say 'a grave-maker.' The houses he makes lasts
    To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
    clouts.
    That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
    'Tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
    But you shall hear. Thus:
    Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
    further trade with us?
    if that his Majesty would aught with us,
  King. Bring him before us.
  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
  Both. We will haste us.
  Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
    Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
    Leave us.
    Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
         With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    This unprevailing woe, and think of us
    It could not move thus.  
    Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
  King. How long hath she been thus?
    Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
                                                       Polonius.
Polonius, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelius,]
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
Enter Queen and Polonius.
                                 Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius.
                   Enter King and Polonius.
              Enter Polonius, Voltemand, and Cornelius.
                                      Exeunt King and Polonius].
  Laertes, son to Polonius.
  Ophelia, daughter to Polonius.
  Reynaldo, servant to Polonius.
                            Enter Polonius.
                         Enter Polonius.
                        Enter Polonius.
                   Enter Polonius.
                       Enter Polonius.  
                         [Lifts up the arras and sees Polonius.]
  King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
    For your desire to know what is between us,
  Ber. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
  King. Where is Polonius?
                   Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
                                                [Exit Polonius.]
    If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
                                                Exit [Polonius].  
    Marcellus?
                    Enter Horatio and Marcellus.  
                                                Exit [Polonius].
  King. Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
            [Makes a pass through the arras and] kills Polonius.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
                         Enter Lucianus.
    When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us
    it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
    Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
    Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
    strumpet. What news ?
  King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
    Of blue Olympus.
    How now? What news?
    Be you content to lend your patience to us,
  Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
    Even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.  
    Hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
    This presence knows,
    This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
    Convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
  Pol. I did enact Julius Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brutus
    Yet have I in me something dangerous,
    Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
  Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
                                                 The cock crows.
    question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
    As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
    and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' Sundays.
    reputation and profit, was better both ways.
    Look to't, I charge you. Come your ways.
    Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
    own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
    On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
    That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat
  Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
    Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
    But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
    Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
    Had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,
    I ha't!
  Ham. What?
    Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't.
    knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
    How dost thou, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that
  Pol. [to the King] O, ho! do you mark that?
                           [Hamlet moves him to put on his hat.]
    As may dishonour him- take heed of that;
    Are most select and generous, chief in that.
    And for my soul, what can it do to that,
  Clown. E'en that.
    A villain kills my father; and for that,
  Laer. How now? What noise is that?
  Oph. Do you doubt that?
    now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that
    (As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that,
    tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
    I would know that.
  Pol. Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-
  Ham. I must to England; you know that?
    beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
  Ros. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
  Ros. Believe what?
    needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what
    dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
  Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
    I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
  Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
    all welcome. We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at
      To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
    Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
    Is thought-sick at the act.
    At gaming, swearing, or about some act
  Ham. Such an act
  Ham. What did you enact?
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
    Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
  Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.
    That are but mutes or audience to this act,
    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
  Queen. Ay me, what act,
    The leperous distilment; whose effect
    By letters congruing to that effect,
    That we find out the cause of this effect-
    'Twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
  Pol. [aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    As will not leave their tinct.
    Must give us pause. There's the respect
    To lay our service freely at your feet,
                                  [Sits down at Ophelia's feet.]  
         O, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
           For and a shrouding sheet;
    (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
              For such a guest is meet.
           For such a guest is meet.
    When in one line two crafts directly meet.  
    counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
    And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
         Methought it was very sweet;
      Most necessary 'tis that we forget
    Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
  Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
    And put it in his pocket!  
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
                                        Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.
    How does my good Lord Hamlet?
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
  Oph. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.  
    I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
  Mar. Lord Hamlet!
    Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
  Gentlemen. (within) Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
    That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,
    The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
  King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
    Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
    This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet
  King. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
  King. How fares our cousin Hamlet?
Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,
  Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
  Horatio, friend to Hamlet.
    Speak to her, Hamlet.
                          Enter Hamlet.
                           Enter Hamlet.
  Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
                         Enter Hamlet.
  King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
  Getrude, Queen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.
    Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet.
  King. What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
                                           Ghost beckons Hamlet.
  Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
    No more, sweet Hamlet!
    Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
  Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet!
                                        [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]  
                                        Exeunt [all but Hamlet].
                                        [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]
    But you'll be secret?
    And with a sudden vigour it doth posset
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
  King. Ay, Hamlet.
  Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
  Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
    prais'd my Lord Such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
  Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
         That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
  Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet?  
    Pays homage to us,- thou mayst not coldly set
  Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
                                Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet.
    From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
    Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
    And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet
  Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
    Here's yet some liquor left.
    By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
The Queen's closet.
      Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
    The death I gave him. So again, good night.
  Ber. Well, good night.
    With wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
  Fran. Give you good night.
    In the dead vast and middle of the night
    Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
  Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
    'Tis now the very witching time of night,
    Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night.
    Hold you the watch to-night?
  Ham. I will watch to-night.
    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!
    Let us impart what we have seen to-night
  Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
  Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.
    That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
    And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
  Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
    With us to watch the minutes of this night,
  Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
    Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
    Thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright  
  King. It falls right.
    That ever I was born to set it right!
    And vanish'd from our sight.
    Or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
  Fort. Where is this sight?
    Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
    But answer made it none. Yet once methought
    Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
  Pol. Marry, well bethought!
    I never gave you aught.
    And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught,-
    But in our circumstance and course of thought,
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
    With the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
    Termagant. It out-herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.
    sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it
  Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
  Rey. My lord, I did intend it.
  Ham. Yours, yours. [Exit Osric.] He does well to commend it
    imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it
  Ham. So be it!
    very liberal conceit.
    excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
    Could force his soul so to his own conceit
    A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
    And draw you into madness? Think of it.
  Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it.
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
    It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
  Hor. Never believe it.
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
  Ham. Do not believe it.
    Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
    repair hither and say you are not fit.
    And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
    We would not understand what was most fit,
    And will not wrong it.
    To let you know of it.
    I chiefly lov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it
    But do not go with it!
    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
    Than your particular demands will touch it.
    Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
  Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
  Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
  Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
  Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.-
  Ham. No, you will reveal it.
    Of Hamlet's transformation. So I call it,
  Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
    bet against the Danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
    To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
    So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
               A table and flagons of wine on it.  
  Ham. Did you not speak to it?
    He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
    Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
    But truly I do fear it.
  Fort. Let us haste to hear it,  
    And am most sensibly in grief for it,
  Guil. The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
    The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
  Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
Exit.
  Ham. Whose was it?
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Exit.
  Hor. Heaven will direct it.
    Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
    And I beseech you instantly to visit
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
    Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
  Ham. It will not speak. Then will I follow it.
    It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
    Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.         Exit.
    Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me.                      Exit.  
  Laer. Farewell.                                          Exit.
    Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.             Exit.
    My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!            Exit.
    Words without thoughts never to heaven go.             Exit.
  Pol. I will say so.                                      Exit.
    they are. To a nunnery, go.                            Exit.
  Capt. God b' wi' you, sir.                             [Exit.]
    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.              Exit.
    ladies. Good night, good night.                         Exit
    Give you good night.                                   Exit.
    But that this folly douts it.                          Exit.
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.
      We beg your hearing patiently.                     [Exit.]
  King. I do not think't.
  King. We will try it.
    O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
  Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
    Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
    So full of artless jealousy is guilt
    calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
    Of general assault.  
Lords Attendant.
Enter Horatio with an Attendant.
                                               [Exit Attendant.]
  Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
  Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?
  Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
    And they can well on horseback; but this gallant  
             Queen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.]
    And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.
    Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
    Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
      Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
    And call it accident.
  Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent
    Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
    How in my words somever she be shent,
      Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
    A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
  Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.
    I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
    I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
  Ham. Judgment!
    Divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
    And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
    Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
    And enterprises of great pith and moment
    Is not to stir without great argument,
    This grave shall have a living monument.
    Should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
    Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
    Which is not tomb enough and continent
                                                          Exeunt
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.
  Pol. [aside] Though this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-
                                                         Exeunt.
                                                         Exeunt.
    on't.
    It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
                                                         Exeunt.
  Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
                                                         Exeunt.
  Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
    That has no relish of salvation in't-
                                                         Exeunt.
    Haply the seas, and countries different,
  Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.
  King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
    Of thinking too precisely on th' event,-
    My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
    spent.
    sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't
    Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
    What think you on't?
                                                         Exeunt.
    To give it due content.
    From fashion of himself. What think you on't?
    Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
    This is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point
  Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't!
    I have sworn't.
    Do I impart toward you. For your intent  
                                                         Exeunt.
    very day that young Hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
    Contagious blastments are most imminent.
                                                         Exeunt.
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,  
                                                         Exeunt.
    Against the which a moiety competent
    Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.         Exeunt.
    To him from whom you brought them.                   Exeunt.
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.           Exeunt.
    No reckoning made, but sent to my account
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
  Laer. I will do't!
    epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'
  Clown. To't.
    That thou so many princes at a shot
  Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
    Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
    not.
    A brother's murther! Pray can I not,
  Ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
  Laer. O, fear me not!
  King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words are not
    To you in satisfaction; but if not,  
  Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
  Both. My lord, we will not.
    Of all their conference. If she find him not,
  Guil. Believe me, I cannot.
  Guil. My lord, I cannot.
  Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
  Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
  Ham. Sir, I cannot.
  Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.
    him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
  Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but I cannot
    Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
    insert in't, could you not?
    Shall you my son. You have me, have you not
  Ham. Nay, that follows not.
  Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
    Try what repentance can. What can it not?
    might it not?
    Looking before and after, gave us not
    continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
  Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
  Hor. In what particular thought to work I know not;
    it not?
    Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
  Ham. Nay, I know not.
  Ham. To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not
  Ros. No indeed are they not.  
    I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
  Both. My lord, from head to foot.
         With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
           'As by lot, God wot,'
    as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
            Young men will do't if they come to't
  Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
  Hor. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
  Ghost. I find thee apt;
    A face without a heart,'
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
    There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
    This something-settled matter in his heart,
  Ham. Nay, but swear't.
    We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
  Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
    If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
  Pol. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
  Queen. More matter, with less art.
    It warms the very sickness in my heart
    Such as it is; and for my own poor part,
    And shall I couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
    And I am sick at heart.
  Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
    The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
    Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
    But farewell it, for I will use no art.  
    sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
    Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
    I hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
    Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
    a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.  
    Lest with this piteous action you convert
    And gave you such a masterly report
    To make it truster of your own report
    That she should lock herself from his resort,
    And with a look so piteous in purport
      When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
  King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
    As it is common for the younger sort
    To hear of it. They are here about the court,
    My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast-'
    That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
  Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
      Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
  Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
    Before my daughter told me), what might you,
  Laer. Where is this king?- Sirs, staid you all without.
    inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
      For husband shalt thou-
                        Enter Ghost.
    servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most
    Make you to ravel all this matter out,
    Moreover that we much did long to see you,
  Pol. My lord, I have news to tell you.
    my leave of you.
    So to seduce!- won to his shameful lust
    May do t' express his love and friending to you,
    What I have said to you.
    That I have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
    As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
    Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
    That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
    hath sent me to you.
    my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you  
    And that in way of caution- I must tell you
      None wed the second but who killed the first.
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
    it. Adieu.
    To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
    By indirections find directions out.
  Laer. And so have I a noble father lost;
    Where you may see the inmost part of you.
  Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
    given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
    But let me hear from you.
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Hor. Not when I saw't.
  Ham. I pray you.
    I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
  Other. But is this law?
    have sent for you.
  Laer. A touch, a touch; I do confess't.
  Pol. Ophelia, walk you here.- Gracious, so please you,
    The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
  Sailor. 'A shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
    And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
  Ham. I do beseech you.
    And he to England shall along with you.
  Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
    Come. (They play.) Another hit. What say you?
  Ham. Arm'd, say you?
  Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
    the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
    When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
    the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
    This heavy-headed revel east and west
  Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?
    By laboursome petition, and at last
  Ham. Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with you.
    them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou
  King. Who shall stay you?
    And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b' wi', you.
      Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
    them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
    Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
  Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
    My too much changed son.- Go, some of you,
  Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
  Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
    there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
    This marvel to you.
    Who hath reliev'd you?
    Give me one poor request.
  Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
    To serve in such a difference. What devil was't
    Your sudden coming o'er to play with you.
    Is strict in his arrest) O, I could tell you-
  Both. We'll wait upon you.  
    And either [master] the devil, or throw him out
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
    Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
    for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again.- What do you
  King. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
  Ham. How purpos'd, sir, I pray you?
    To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
  A Priest.
      That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
  Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,
  King. He made confession of you;
    Treachery! Seek it out.
  Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
    A couch for luxury and damned incest.
    She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
  Queen. I shall obey you;
    I'll rant as well as thou.
    philosophy could find it out.
    So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
  Ham. My fate cries out
    You, as your business and desires shall point you,
  Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
    With all my love I do commend me to you;
    The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You
    Mark you,
  Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you;
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
    I'll visit you.
    And when you are desirous to be blest,
    Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
      When second husband let me be accurst!
    dungeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.
  Hor. I beseech you.
    'Thus didest thou.'
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
  Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
                         Enter Ghost.
  Clown. 'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
                 Exeunt Polonius and Players [except the First].
    Whose motive in this case should stir me most
    Good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
    Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
  King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
    The trumpet to the cannoneer without,  
  Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
  Laer. A Norman was't?
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Queen. O, confound the rest!
  King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
    And a most instant tetter bark'd about,  
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
    So, proceed you.
                                                     Exit Ghost.
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
  Ros. [aside to Guildenstern] What say you?
  Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
  Queen. Alas, how is't with you,  
    Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw  
    But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
    Will not debate the question of this straw.
    know a hawk from a handsaw.
    Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
    High on a stage be placed to the view;
  Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
  Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
    Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
    But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
  Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.
    it is but a shadow's shadow.
    But I have that within which passeth show-
            And I a maid at your window,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,
    through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
      The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
  King. [rises] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
    A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
    of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
    Therefore let's follow.
    The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
  King. Not that I know.
    And tell you what I know.
         How should I your true-love know
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
  Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
    And ever three parts coward,- I do not know
    But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;
    And prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,
  Oph. My lord, I do not know,
    It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
 and then, you know,
      Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;
  Laer. My lord, I'll hit him now.
  Ham. What's the matter now?
    How to forget that learning; but, sir, now  
    I be so able as now.
  Ham. What hour now?
         His beard was as white as snow,
    (Sings) White his shroud as the mountain snow-
  Ham. If she should break it now!
    See you now-
    Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,  
  Laer. Have at you now!
    And lose the name of action.- Soft you now!
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
    Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
    See what a grace was seated on this brow;
    Does by their own insinuation grow.
    That it went hand in hand even with the vow
    Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
    To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
  Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
    Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
    And in the cup an union shall he throw
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
    And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
    translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
    With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
    Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
    Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
    How does your honour for this many a day?
  Ber. Say-
    And do such bitter business as the day
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,
    No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
    (Sings) To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
    The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
    The changeling never known. Now, the next day  
    That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
  Laer. Say you so? Come on.                               Play.
    Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
    The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
          The hart ungalled play;
    That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
  Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
  Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
  King. What do you call the play?
  Pol. Give o'er the play.
    But if you hold it fit, after the play
                                                Prepare to play.
  Laer. Come, my lord.                                They play.
    Laertes before you fall to play.  
  Ham. Madam, how like you this play?
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
    For they are actions that a man might play;
  Oph. Madam, I wish it may.
    My soul is full of discord and dismay.
    That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
    Let Hercules himself do what he may,
    Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
    And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
    Look you, I'll go pray.
    say-
    O, say!
  Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
    Art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.  
    Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
    answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
    i' th' university, you say?
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
          Thus runs the world away.
  King. Give me some light! Away!
    Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
  Clown. Very strangely, they say.
  Osr. Nothing neither way.
    If Hamlet from himself be taken away,
    And hit the woundless air.- O, come away!
    Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
  Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!  
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
  King. O Gertrude, come away!
  Ber. See, it stalks away!
  Ham. Do the boys carry it away?  
  Pol. Away, I do beseech you, both away
  Fortinbras, Prince of Norway.  
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,  
    They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
    Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
  Pol. Marry, I will teach you! Think yourself a baby
    Here in the lobby.
    the stair, into the lobby.
    top of my bent.- I will come by-and-by.
    Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
  Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
    That, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
    The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
    With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
    No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
    That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
      Here stooping to your clemency,
    That he is open to incontinency.
  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy.
    To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
  Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
    Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
    the players ready.
    Thou know'st already.
    make you ready.
    One word more, good lady.
    (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,  
  Ham. How is it with you, lady?
  King. How do you, pretty lady?
    Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
    That, open'd, lies within our remedy.
         For if the King like not the comedy,
  Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
    Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
  King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
  Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
    Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
    The natural gates and alleys of the body,
  Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.
    All my smooth body.
    And makes each petty artire in this body
    With which she followed my poor father's body
    Unto the voice and yielding of that body
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
    But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
  Guil. But we both obey,
    ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
  Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
    they?
                [Laertes wounds Hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
    This warlike volley.
  Ham. Why?
  Ham. Why,
  Ham. Why,
    Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
  Ham. I embrace it freely,
    humanity so abominably.
  Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
    waterfly?
  Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
      On wholesome life usurp immediately.
  Ham. How strangely?
    Subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
    Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
    argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
    Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
    tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
  Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
    And for your rapier most especially,
  Ham. Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally.
    Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
    Yes, faith, heartily.
    For good Polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
  Clown. Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she wilfully
    Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
  King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
    Most free in his reply.
    appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
    Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
    You do not understand yourself so clearly
  Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
  Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
  Hor. Most constantly.
  Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
  Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently.
    Been struck so to the soul that presently
    That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
    His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
      Directly seasons him his enemy.
    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
  Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
    feather. I have of late- but wherefore I know not- lost all my
    pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
    I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
    willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
    I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my
    heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? for, by my
  Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
    And hath abatements and delays as many  
  Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
  Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy  
    Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
      Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
    Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
      The violence of either grief or joy
    [Sings] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
      Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
      Meet what I would have well, and it destroy,
  Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
    spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
    As England was his faithful tributary,
  Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!  
    When in your motion you are hot and dry-  
    glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
    Well ratified by law and heraldry,
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    And our vain blows malicious mockery.
    I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
    He likewise gives a frock or livery,
    And these few precepts in thy memory
      Purpose is but the slave to memory,
  Ham. Sir, a whole history.
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    That are so fortified against our story,
  Ham. O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
  Pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- Ay, marry!
    That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
    there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
    Of man and country-
    A station like the herald Mercury
      And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
    With this regard their currents turn awry
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;
  Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
    Is not this something more than fantasy?
  Ham. Ecstasy?
    This bodiless creation ecstasy
  Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
    And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
    Than to entreaty.
      In neither aught, or in extremity.
      Of violent birth, but poor validity;
    gone, far gone! And truly in my youth I suff'red much extremity
    And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
  King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,-
    tragedians of the city.
    From me, whose love was of that dignity
    Passing through nature to eternity.  
    To his unmast'red importunity.
    That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
      For women's fear and love holds quantity,
    [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity,  
    That they may seem the taints of liberty,
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,
    If you desire to know the certainty
      Thy natural magic and dire property
    To youth and liberty.
    That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
    That live and feed upon your Majesty.
    To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
  Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,
    a thing to you from his Majesty.
    The lives of many. The cesse of majesty
  Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
    And we did think it writ down in our duty
    musty.
    Over the nasty sty!
    As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
  Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
    discourse to your beauty.
  Cor., Volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
    Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,  
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
                    Enter Rosencrantz.
    march. [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
  Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.  
  Ham. Buzz, buzz!
------------------------------------------source text-----------------------------------------THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK
by William Shakespeare
Dramatis Personae
  Claudius, King of Denmark.
  Marcellus, Officer.
  Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
  Polonius, Lord Chamberlain.
  Horatio, friend to Hamlet.
  Laertes, son to Polonius.
  Voltemand, courtier.
  Cornelius, courtier.
  Rosencrantz, courtier.
  Guildenstern, courtier.
  Osric, courtier.
  A Gentleman, courtier.
  A Priest.
  Marcellus, officer.
  Bernardo, officer.
  Francisco, a soldier
  Reynaldo, servant to Polonius.
  Players.
  Two Clowns, gravediggers.
  Fortinbras, Prince of Norway.  
  A Norwegian Captain.
  English Ambassadors.
  Getrude, Queen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.
  Ophelia, daughter to Polonius.
  Ghost of Hamlet's Father.
  Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.
SCENE.- Elsinore.
ACT I. Scene I.
Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.
Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down
at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].
  Ber. Who's there.?
  Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
  Ber. Long live the King!
  Fran. Bernardo?
  Ber. He.
  Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.
  Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
  Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
    And I am sick at heart.
  Ber. Have you had quiet guard?
  Fran. Not a mouse stirring.
  Ber. Well, good night.
    If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
                    Enter Horatio and Marcellus.  
  Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
  Hor. Friends to this ground.
  Mar. And liegemen to the Dane.
  Fran. Give you good night.
  Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
    Who hath reliev'd you?
  Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
    Give you good night.                                   Exit.
  Mar. Holla, Bernardo!
  Ber. Say-
    What, is Horatio there ?
  Hor. A piece of him.
  Ber. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.
  Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
  Ber. I have seen nothing.
  Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
    And will not let belief take hold of him
    Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
    Therefore I have entreated him along,  
    With us to watch the minutes of this night,
    That, if again this apparition come,
    He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
  Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
  Ber. Sit down awhile,
    And let us once again assail your ears,
    That are so fortified against our story,
    What we two nights have seen.
  Hor. Well, sit we down,
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.
  Ber. Last night of all,
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole
    Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
    Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
    The bell then beating one-
                        Enter Ghost.
  Mar. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
  Ber. In the same figure, like the King that's dead.  
  Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
  Ber. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
  Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
  Ber. It would be spoke to.
  Mar. Question it, Horatio.
  Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
  Mar. It is offended.
  Ber. See, it stalks away!
  Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Mar. 'Tis gone and will not answer.
  Ber. How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.
    Is not this something more than fantasy?
    What think you on't?
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe
    Without the sensible and true avouch
    Of mine own eyes.  
  Mar. Is it not like the King?
  Hor. As thou art to thyself.
    Such was the very armour he had on
    When he th' ambitious Norway combated.
    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
    'Tis strange.
  Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
    With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
  Hor. In what particular thought to work I know not;
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
    This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
  Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    So nightly toils the subject of the land,
    And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
    And foreign mart for implements of war;
    Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
    Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
    What might be toward, that this sweaty haste  
    Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
    Who is't that can inform me?
  Hor. That can I.
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
    Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
    Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
    Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
    (For so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
    Well ratified by law and heraldry,
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
    Against the which a moiety competent
    Was gaged by our king; which had return'd
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
    Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
    And carriage of the article design'd,
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
    Of unimproved mettle hot and full,  
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    As it doth well appear unto our state,
    But to recover of us, by strong hand
    And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    Is the main motive of our preparations,
    The source of this our watch, and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
  Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
    Well may it sort that this portentous figure
    Comes armed through our watch, so like the King
    That was and is the question of these wars.
  Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;  
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
    And even the like precurse of fierce events,
    As harbingers preceding still the fates
    And prologue to the omen coming on,
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
    Unto our climature and countrymen.
                      Enter Ghost again.
    But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
    I'll cross it, though it blast me.- Stay illusion!
                                               Spreads his arms.
    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
    Speak to me.
    If there be any good thing to be done,
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    Speak to me.  
    If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
    Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
    O, speak!
    Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
    Extorted treasure in the womb of earth
    (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
                                                 The cock crows.
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
  Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
  Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
  Ber. 'Tis here!
  Hor. 'Tis here!
  Mar. 'Tis gone!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    To offer it the show of violence;
    For it is as the air, invulnerable,
    And our vain blows malicious mockery.
  Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
  Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing  
    Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
    Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
    To his confine; and of the truth herein
    This present object made probation.
  Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
    Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
  Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it.
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
    Break we our watch up; and by my advice  
    Let us impart what we have seen to-night
    Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
    Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
    As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.           Exeunt.
Scene II.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.
Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,
Polonius, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelius,]
Lords Attendant.
  King. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
    The memory be green, and that it us befitted
    To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
    To be contracted in one brow of woe,
    Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
    That we with wisest sorrow think on him
    Together with remembrance of ourselves.
    Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
    Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
    Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
    With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
    With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
    In equal scale weighing delight and dole,
    Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
    Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone  
    With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
    Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
    Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
    Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
    Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
    Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
    He hath not fail'd to pester us with message
    Importing the surrender of those lands
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
    To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
    Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
    To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
    Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
    Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
    His further gait herein, in that the levies,
    The lists, and full proportions are all made
    Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
    You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,  
    Giving to you no further personal power
    To business with the King, more than the scope
    Of these dilated articles allow.            [Gives a paper.]
    Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
  Cor., Volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
  King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
                                 Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius.
    And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
    You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes?
    You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
    And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
    That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
    What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
  Laer. My dread lord,
    Your leave and favour to return to France;
    From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
    To show my duty in your coronation,  
    Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
    My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
    And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
  King. Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
  Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
    By laboursome petition, and at last
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.
    I do beseech you give him leave to go.
  King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
    And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
    But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-
  Ham. [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!
  King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
  Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
  Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
    And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
    Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
    Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
    Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
    Passing through nature to eternity.  
  Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
  Queen. If it be,
    Why seems it so particular with thee?
  Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    Nor customary suits of solemn black,
    Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
    Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
    'That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
    For they are actions that a man might play;
    But I have that within which passeth show-
    These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
  King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
    To give these mourning duties to your father;
    But you must know, your father lost a father;
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    In filial obligation for some term
    To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever  
    In obstinate condolement is a course
    Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief;
    It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
    A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
    An understanding simple and unschool'd;
    For what we know must be, and is as common
    As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
    Why should we in our peevish opposition
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    To reason most absurd, whose common theme
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,
    'This must be so.' We pray you throw to earth
    This unprevailing woe, and think of us
    As of a father; for let the world take note
    You are the most immediate to our throne,
    And with no less nobility of love
    Than that which dearest father bears his son
    Do I impart toward you. For your intent  
    In going back to school in Wittenberg,
    It is most retrograde to our desire;
    And we beseech you, bend you to remain
    Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
    Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
  Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
    I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
  Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
  King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
    Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come.
    This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet
    Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
    No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day
    But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
    And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
    Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
                                Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet.
  Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
    Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
    Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd  
    His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
    How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
    Seem to me all the uses of this world!
    Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
    That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
    Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
    But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
    So excellent a king, that was to this
    Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
    Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
    Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
    As if increase of appetite had grown
    By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
    Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-
    A little month, or ere those shoes were old
    With which she followed my poor father's body
    Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
    (O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason
    Would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;  
    My father's brother, but no more like my father
    Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
    Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
    Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
    She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
    With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
    It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
    But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!
          Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.
  Hor. Hail to your lordship!
  Ham. I am glad to see you well.
    Horatio!- or I do forget myself.
  Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
  Ham. Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with you.
    And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
    Marcellus?
  Mar. My good lord!
  Ham. I am very glad to see you.- [To Bernardo] Good even, sir.-  
    But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
  Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
  Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
    Nor shall you do my ear that violence
    To make it truster of your own report
    Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
    But what is your affair in Elsinore?
    We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
  Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
  Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
  Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
  Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
    Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
    Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
    My father- methinks I see my father.
  Hor. O, where, my lord?
  Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio.
  Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.  
  Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
    I shall not look upon his like again.
  Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
  Ham. Saw? who?
  Hor. My lord, the King your father.
  Ham. The King my father?
  Hor. Season your admiration for a while
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
    This marvel to you.
  Ham. For God's love let me hear!
  Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
    (Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch
    In the dead vast and middle of the night
    Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd  
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
    Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
    In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
    And I with them the third night kept the watch;
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
    The apparition comes. I knew your father.
    These hands are not more like.
  Ham. But where was this?
  Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
  Ham. Did you not speak to it?
  Hor. My lord, I did;
    But answer made it none. Yet once methought
    It lifted up it head and did address
    Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
    And vanish'd from our sight.
  Ham. 'Tis very strange.
  Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;  
    And we did think it writ down in our duty
    To let you know of it.
  Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
    Hold you the watch to-night?
  Both [Mar. and Ber.] We do, my lord.
  Ham. Arm'd, say you?
  Both. Arm'd, my lord.
  Ham. From top to toe?
  Both. My lord, from head to foot.
  Ham. Then saw you not his face?
  Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
  Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
  Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
  Ham. Pale or red?
  Hor. Nay, very pale.
  Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
  Hor. Most constantly.
  Ham. I would I had been there.
  Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
  Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?  
  Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
  Both. Longer, longer.
  Hor. Not when I saw't.
  Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
  Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    A sable silver'd.
  Ham. I will watch to-night.
    Perchance 'twill walk again.
  Hor. I warr'nt it will.
  Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
    I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
    And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
    Let it be tenable in your silence still;
    And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
    Give it an understanding but no tongue.
    I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
    I'll visit you.
  All. Our duty to your honour.  
  Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
                                        Exeunt [all but Hamlet].
    My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
    I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
    Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
    Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
Exit.
Scene III.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
Enter Laertes and Ophelia.
  Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
    But let me hear from you.
  Oph. Do you doubt that?
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
    Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
    A violet in the youth of primy nature,
    Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
    The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
    No more.
  Oph. No more but so?
  Laer. Think it no more.
    For nature crescent does not grow alone
    In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
    The inward service of the mind and soul
    Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,  
    And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
    The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
    For he himself is subject to his birth.
    He may not, as unvalued persons do,
    Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
    The safety and health of this whole state,
    And therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
    Unto the voice and yielding of that body
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
    It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
    As he in his particular act and place
    May give his saying deed; which is no further
    Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
    Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
    If with too credent ear you list his songs,
    Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
    To his unmast'red importunity.
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    And keep you in the rear of your affection,  
    Out of the shot and danger of desire.
    The chariest maid is prodigal enough
    If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
    Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.
    The canker galls the infants of the spring
    Too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
    And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
    Contagious blastments are most imminent.
    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
    Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
  Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
    As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
    Do not as some ungracious pastors do,
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
    Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
    And recks not his own rede.
  Laer. O, fear me not!
                       Enter Polonius.  
    I stay too long. But here my father comes.
    A double blessing is a double grace;
    Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
  Pol. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
    The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
    And you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
    And these few precepts in thy memory
    Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
    Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
    Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
    Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
    Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
    Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,  
    But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    Are most select and generous, chief in that.
    Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    This above all- to thine own self be true,
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.
    Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
  Laer. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
  Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
  Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
    What I have said to you.
  Oph. 'Tis in my memory lock'd,
    And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
  Laer. Farewell.                                          Exit.
  Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
  Oph. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.  
  Pol. Marry, well bethought!
    'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
    Given private time to you, and you yourself
    Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
    If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
    And that in way of caution- I must tell you
    You do not understand yourself so clearly
    As it behooves my daughter and your honour.
    What is between you? Give me up the truth.
  Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
    Of his affection to me.
  Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
    Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
  Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think,
  Pol. Marry, I will teach you! Think yourself a baby
    That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
    Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
    Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
    Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.  
  Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love
    In honourable fashion.
  Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
  Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
    With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
  Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
    When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
    Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
    Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    You must not take for fire. From this time
    Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
    Set your entreatments at a higher rate
    Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
    Believe so much in him, that he is young,
    And with a larger tether may he walk
    Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,
    But mere implorators of unholy suits,  
    Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
    The better to beguile. This is for all:
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
    Have you so slander any moment leisure
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
    Look to't, I charge you. Come your ways.
  Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene IV.
Elsinore. The platform before the Castle.
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
  Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
  Ham. What hour now?
  Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
  Mar. No, it is struck.
  Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
                   A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
    What does this mean, my lord?
  Ham. The King doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
    And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
    The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
    The triumph of his pledge.
  Hor. Is it a custom?
  Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
    But to my mind, though I am native here  
    And to the manner born, it is a custom
    More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
    This heavy-headed revel east and west
    Makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
    They clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
    Soil our addition; and indeed it takes
    From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
    The pith and marrow of our attribute.
    So oft it chances in particular men
    That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,
    Since nature cannot choose his origin,-
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
    Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
    The form of plausive manners, that these men
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
    Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
    Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
    As infinite as man may undergo-  
    Shall in the general censure take corruption
    From that particular fault. The dram of e'il
    Doth all the noble substance often dout To his own scandal.
                         Enter Ghost.
  Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
  Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
    Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
    Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
    Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
    Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
    That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,
    King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?
    Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
    Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
    Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
    Hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean  
    That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
    Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
    Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
    So horridly to shake our disposition
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
    Say, why is this? wherefore? What should we do?
                                           Ghost beckons Hamlet.
  Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
    As if it some impartment did desire
    To you alone.
  Mar. Look with what courteous action
    It waves you to a more removed ground.
    But do not go with it!
  Hor. No, by no means!
  Ham. It will not speak. Then will I follow it.
  Hor. Do not, my lord!
  Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
    I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
    And for my soul, what can it do to that,
    Being a thing immortal as itself?  
    It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
  Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    And there assume some other, horrible form
    Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
    And draw you into madness? Think of it.
    The very place puts toys of desperation,
    Without more motive, into every brain
    That looks so many fadoms to the sea
    And hears it roar beneath.
  Ham. It waves me still.
    Go on. I'll follow thee.
  Mar. You shall not go, my lord.
  Ham. Hold off your hands!
  Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
  Ham. My fate cries out
    And makes each petty artire in this body
    As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
                                                [Ghost beckons.]  
    Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
    By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!-
    I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow thee.
                                        Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.
  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
  Mar. Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
  Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
  Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
  Hor. Heaven will direct it.
  Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene V.
Elsinore. The Castle. Another part of the fortifications.
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
  Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
  Ghost. Mark me.
  Ham. I will.
  Ghost. My hour is almost come,
    When I to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
    Must render up myself.
  Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
  Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
    To what I shall unfold.
  Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.
  Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
  Ham. What?
  Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
    Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
    And for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
    Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
    Are burnt and purg'd away. But that I am forbid  
    To tell the secrets of my prison house,
    I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
    Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
    And each particular hair to stand an end
    Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
    But this eternal blazon must not be
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
    If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
  Ham. O God!
  Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
  Ham. Murther?
  Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
    But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
  Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
    As meditation or the thoughts of love,
    May sweep to my revenge.
  Ghost. I find thee apt;
    And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed  
    That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
    Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
    A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
    Is by a forged process of my death
    Rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life
    Now wears his crown.
  Ham. O my prophetic soul!
    My uncle?
  Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
    With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
    So to seduce!- won to his shameful lust
    The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
    From me, whose love was of that dignity
    That it went hand in hand even with the vow
    I made to her in marriage, and to decline
    Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor  
    To those of mine!
    But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
    Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
    So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
    Will sate itself in a celestial bed
    And prey on garbage.
    But soft! methinks I scent the morning air.
    Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
    My custom always of the afternoon,
    Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
    With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
    And in the porches of my ears did pour
    The leperous distilment; whose effect
    Holds such an enmity with blood of man
    That swift as quicksilverr it courses through
    The natural gates and alleys of the body,
    And with a sudden vigour it doth posset
    And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
    The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
    And a most instant tetter bark'd about,  
    Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
    All my smooth body.
    Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
    Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
    Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
    Unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
    No reckoning made, but sent to my account
    With all my imperfections on my head.
  Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
  Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
    A couch for luxury and damned incest.
    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
    Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
    Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
    And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
    To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
    The glowworm shows the matin to be near
    And gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
    Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me.                      Exit.  
  Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
    And shall I couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
    And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
    But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
    Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
    That youth and observation copied there,
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
    Unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
    O most pernicious woman!
    O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
    My tables! Meet it is I set it down
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
    At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.        [Writes.]
    So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
    It is 'Adieu, adieu! Remember me.'  
    I have sworn't.
  Hor. (within) My lord, my lord!
                   Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
  Mar. Lord Hamlet!
  Hor. Heaven secure him!
  Ham. So be it!
  Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
  Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
  Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
  Hor. What news, my lord?
  Mar. O, wonderful!
  Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
  Ham. No, you will reveal it.
  Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!
  Mar. Nor I, my lord.
  Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
    But you'll be secret?
  Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.  
  Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark
    But he's an arrant knave.
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
    To tell us this.
  Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
    And so, without more circumstance at all,
    I hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
    You, as your business and desires shall point you,
    For every man hath business and desire,
    Such as it is; and for my own poor part,
    Look you, I'll go pray.
  Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
  Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
    Yes, faith, heartily.
  Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
    And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
    For your desire to know what is between us,
    O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,  
    As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
    Give me one poor request.
  Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
  Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.
  Both. My lord, we will not.
  Ham. Nay, but swear't.
  Hor. In faith,
    My lord, not I.
  Mar. Nor I, my lord- in faith.
  Ham. Upon my sword.
  Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
  Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
                 Ghost cries under the stage.
  Ghost. Swear.
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
    Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
    Consent to swear.
  Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.  
  Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.
    Swear by my sword.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
  Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
    Come hither, gentlemen,
    And lay your hands again upon my sword.
    Never to speak of this that you have heard:
    Swear by my sword.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear by his sword.
  Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
    A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."
  Hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
  Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
    There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
    Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
    But come!
    Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
    How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself
    (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
    To put an antic disposition on),  
    That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
    With arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
    Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
    As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
    Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
    That you know aught of me- this is not to do,
    So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
    Swear.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
                                                   [They swear.]
  Ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
    With all my love I do commend me to you;
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
    May do t' express his love and friending to you,
    God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
    And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
    The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
    That ever I was born to set it right!
    Nay, come, let's go together.  
                                                         Exeunt.
Act II. Scene I.
Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.
Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.
  Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
  Rey. I will, my lord.
  Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
    Before You visit him, to make inquire
    Of his behaviour.
  Rey. My lord, I did intend it.
  Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
    Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    What company, at what expense; and finding
    By this encompassment and drift of question
    That they do know my son, come you more nearer
    Than your particular demands will touch it.
    Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
    And in part him.' Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
  Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.  
  Pol. 'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.
    But if't be he I mean, he's very wild
    Addicted so and so'; and there put on him
    What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
    As may dishonour him- take heed of that;
    But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
    As are companions noted and most known
    To youth and liberty.
  Rey. As gaming, my lord.
  Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
    Drabbing. You may go so far.
  Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.
  Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
    You must not put another scandal on him,
    That he is open to incontinency.
    That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
    That they may seem the taints of liberty,
    The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
    A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
    Of general assault.  
  Rey. But, my good lord-
  Pol. Wherefore should you do this?
  Rey. Ay, my lord,
    I would know that.
  Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
    And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.
    You laying these slight sullies on my son
    As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
    Mark you,
    Your party in converse, him you would sound,
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
    The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
    He closes with you in this consequence:
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
    According to the phrase or the addition
    Of man and country-
  Rey. Very good, my lord.
  Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
    By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?
  Rey. At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and  
    gentleman.'
  Pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- Ay, marry!
    He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman.
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
    Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
    There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
    There falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
    'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
    See you now-
    Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
    And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
    With windlasses and with assays of bias,
    By indirections find directions out.
    So, by my former lecture and advice,
    Shall you my son. You have me, have you not
  Rey. My lord, I have.
  Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
  Rey. Good my lord!                                    [Going.]
  Pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.  
  Rey. I shall, my lord.
  Pol. And let him ply his music.
  Rey. Well, my lord.
  Pol. Farewell!
                                                  Exit Reynaldo.
                       Enter Ophelia.
    How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
  Oph. O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
  Pol. With what, i' th' name of God I
  Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
    Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
    No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
    Ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
    And with a look so piteous in purport
    As if he had been loosed out of hell
    To speak of horrors- he comes before me.
  Pol. Mad for thy love?  
  Oph. My lord, I do not know,
    But truly I do fear it.
  Pol. What said he?
  Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    He falls to such perusal of my face
    As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.
    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
    And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
    He rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
    As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
    And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
    And with his head over his shoulder turn'd
    He seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
    For out o' doors he went without their help
    And to the last bended their light on me.
  Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    Whose violent property fordoes itself  
    And leads the will to desperate undertakings
    As oft as any passion under heaven
    That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
    What, have you given him any hard words of late?
  Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
    I did repel his letters and denied
    His access to me.
  Pol. That hath made him mad.
    I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
    I had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
    And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
    By heaven, it is as proper to our age
    To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
    As it is common for the younger sort
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
    This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
    More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
    Come.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Flourish. [Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, cum aliis.
  King. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
    Moreover that we much did long to see you,
    The need we have to use you did provoke
    Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
    Of Hamlet's transformation. So I call it,
    Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
    Resembles that it was. What it should be,
    More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
    So much from th' understanding of himself,
    I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
    That, being of so young clays brought up with him,
    And since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
    That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
    Some little time; so by your companies
    To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
    So much as from occasion you may glean,  
    Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
    That, open'd, lies within our remedy.
  Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
    And sure I am two men there are not living
    To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
    To show us so much gentry and good will
    As to expend your time with us awhile
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks
    As fits a king's remembrance.
  Ros. Both your Majesties
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    Put your dread pleasures more into command
    Than to entreaty.
  Guil. But we both obey,
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
    To lay our service freely at your feet,
    To be commanded.
  King. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
  Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.  
    And I beseech you instantly to visit
    My too much changed son.- Go, some of you,
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
  Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices
    Pleasant and helpful to him!
  Queen. Ay, amen!
                 Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, [with some
                                                    Attendants].
                         Enter Polonius.
  Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
    Are joyfully return'd.
  King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
  Pol. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
    I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
    Both to my God and to my gracious king;
    And I do think- or else this brain of mine
    Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
    As it hath us'd to do- that I have found  
    The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
  King. O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
  Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
    My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
  King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
                                                [Exit Polonius.]
    He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
    The head and source of all your son's distemper.
  Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
    His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
  King. Well, we shall sift him.
              Enter Polonius, Voltemand, and Cornelius.
    Welcome, my good friends.
    Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
  Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.
    Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
    His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
    To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,  
    But better look'd into, he truly found
    It was against your Highness; whereat griev'd,
    That so his sickness, age, and impotence
    Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
    On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
    Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
    Makes vow before his uncle never more
    To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
    Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
    Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee
    And his commission to employ those soldiers,
    So levied as before, against the Polack;
    With an entreaty, herein further shown,
                                                [Gives a paper.]
    That it might please you to give quiet pass
    Through your dominions for this enterprise,
    On such regards of safety and allowance
    As therein are set down.
  King. It likes us well;
    And at our more consider'd time we'll read,  
    Answer, and think upon this business.
    Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
    Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
    Most welcome home!                       Exeunt Ambassadors.
  Pol. This business is well ended.
    My liege, and madam, to expostulate
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
    Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
    And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
    I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
    Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
    What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
    But let that go.
  Queen. More matter, with less art.
  Pol. Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
    That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
    And pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
    But farewell it, for I will use no art.  
    Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
    That we find out the cause of this effect-
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
    For this effect defective comes by cause.
    Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
    Perpend.
    I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
    Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
    Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
                                             [Reads] the letter.
    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
      Ophelia,'-
    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
      phrase.
    But you shall hear. Thus:
                                                        [Reads.]
    'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
  Queen. Came this from Hamlet to her?
  Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.     [Reads.]  
          'Doubt thou the stars are fire;
            Doubt that the sun doth move;
          Doubt truth to be a liar;
            But never doubt I love.
      'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to
    reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe
    it. Adieu.
      'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
                                                          HAMLET.'
    This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
    All given to mine ear.
  King. But how hath she
    Receiv'd his love?
  Pol. What do you think of me?
  King. As of a man faithful and honourable.
  Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,  
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing
    (As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that,
    Before my daughter told me), what might you,
    Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
    If I had play'd the desk or table book,
    Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
    Or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
    What might you think? No, I went round to work
    And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
    'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
    This must not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,
    That she should lock herself from his resort,
    Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
    And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
    Into the madness wherein now he raves,
    And all we mourn for.  
  King. Do you think 'tis this?
  Queen. it may be, very like.
  Pol. Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-
    That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'
    When it prov'd otherwise.?
  King. Not that I know.
  Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] Take this from this, if this
      be otherwise.
    If circumstances lead me, I will find
    Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
    Within the centre.
  King. How may we try it further?
  Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
    Here in the lobby.
  Queen. So he does indeed.
  Pol. At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
    Be you and I behind an arras then.
    Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
    And he not from his reason fall'n thereon
    Let me be no assistant for a state,  
    But keep a farm and carters.
  King. We will try it.
                 Enter Hamlet, reading on a book.
  Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
  Pol. Away, I do beseech you, both away
    I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
                       Exeunt King and Queen, [with Attendants].
    How does my good Lord Hamlet?
  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy.
  Pol. Do you know me, my lord?
  Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
  Pol. Not I, my lord.
  Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man.
  Pol. Honest, my lord?
  Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
    pick'd out of ten thousand.
  Pol. That's very true, my lord.
  Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god  
    kissing carrion- Have you a daughter?
  Pol. I have, my lord.
  Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
    as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
  Pol. [aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
    he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far
    gone, far gone! And truly in my youth I suff'red much extremity
    for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again.- What do you
    read, my lord?
  Ham. Words, words, words.
  Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
  Ham. Between who?
  Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
  Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
    have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
    purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
    plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
    sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it
    not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
    should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.  
  Pol. [aside] Though this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-
   Will You walk out of the air, my lord?
  Ham. Into my grave?
  Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [Aside] How pregnant sometimes
    his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which
    reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
    will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
    him and my daughter.- My honourable lord, I will most humbly take
    my leave of you.
  Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
    willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
    life,
                    Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  Pol. Fare you well, my lord.
  Ham. These tedious old fools!
  Pol. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
  Ros. [to Polonius] God save you, sir!
                                                Exit [Polonius].  
  Guil. My honour'd lord!
  Ros. My most dear lord!
  Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
    Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
  Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
  Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
    On Fortune's cap we are not the very button.
  Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
  Ros. Neither, my lord.
  Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
    favours?
  Guil. Faith, her privates we.
  Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a
    strumpet. What news ?
  Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
  Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me
    question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
    deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison
    hither?
  Guil. Prison, my lord?  
  Ham. Denmark's a prison.
  Ros. Then is the world one.
  Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
    dungeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.
  Ros. We think not so, my lord.
  Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
    or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
  Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for your
    mind.
  Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
    king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
  Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
    the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
  Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.
  Ros. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
    it is but a shadow's shadow.
  Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd
    heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? for, by my
    fay, I cannot reason.
  Both. We'll wait upon you.  
  Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
    servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most
    dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
    make you at Elsinore?
  Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
  Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you;
    and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
    you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
    visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
  Guil. What should we say, my lord?
  Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and
    there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
    have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen
    have sent for you.
  Ros. To what end, my lord?
  Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
    of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
    obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
    better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with
    me, whether you were sent for or no.  
  Ros. [aside to Guildenstern] What say you?
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold
    not off.
  Guil. My lord, we were sent for.
  Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
    discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no
    feather. I have of late- but wherefore I know not- lost all my
    mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
    heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
    seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
    air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
    roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
    to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a
    piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in
    faculties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in
    action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the
    beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
    is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
    neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
  Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.  
  Ham. Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?
  Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
    entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
  Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall
    have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
    target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
    end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
    lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
    freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
    they?
  Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
    tragedians of the city.
  Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
    reputation and profit, was better both ways.
  Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
    innovation.
  Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
    city? Are they so follow'd?
  Ros. No indeed are they not.  
  Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
  Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
    of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
    dare scarce come thither.
  Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
    escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
    sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
    themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
    are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
    against their own succession.
  Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
    while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
    went to cuffs in the question.
  Ham. Is't possible?
  Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
  Ham. Do the boys carry it away?  
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.
  Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
    those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
    twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
    little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
    philosophy could find it out.
                     Flourish for the Players.
  Guil. There are the players.
  Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
    appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
    with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I
    tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
    entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
    and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
  Guil. In what, my dear lord?
  Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly I
    know a hawk from a handsaw.
  
                            Enter Polonius.
  Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!
  Ham. Hark you, Guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!
    That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
    clouts.
  Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
    man is twice a child.
  Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.-
   You say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.
  Pol. My lord, I have news to tell you.
  Ham. My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in
    Rome-
  Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
  Ham. Buzz, buzz!
  Pol. Upon my honour-
  Ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
  Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
    history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
    tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene  
    individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
    Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
    the only men.
  Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
  Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?
  Ham. Why,
         'One fair daughter, and no more,
           The which he loved passing well.'
  Pol. [aside] Still on my daughter.
  Ham. Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
  Pol. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
    love passing well.
  Ham. Nay, that follows not.
  Pol. What follows then, my lord?
  Ham. Why,
           'As by lot, God wot,'
 and then, you know,
  
           'It came to pass, as most like it was.'
    The first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
    where my abridgment comes.
                     Enter four or five Players.
    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee
    well.- Welcome, good friends.- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is
    valanc'd since I saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
    Denmark?- What, my young lady and mistress? By'r Lady, your
    ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last by the
    altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a piece of
    uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, you are
    all welcome. We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at
    anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a
    taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
  1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd  
    not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as I
    receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said
    there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
    nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
    affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
    sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't
    I chiefly lov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it
    especially where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it live in
    your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast-'
    'Tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
         Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
         When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
         Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd  
         With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
         Now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
         Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
         That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
         To their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
         And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
         With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
         Old grandsire Priam seeks.'
    So, proceed you.
  Pol. Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
     discretion.
  1. Play. 'Anon he finds him,
      Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
      Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
      Repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
      Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
      But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword  
      Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
      Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
      Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
      Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo! his sword,
      Which was declining on the milky head
      Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
      So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
      And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
      Did nothing.
      But, as we often see, against some storm,
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
      The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
      As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
      Aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
      And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
      On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
      With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
      Now falls on Priam.
      Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,  
      In general synod take away her power;
      Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
      And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
      As low as to the fiends!
  Pol. This is too long.
  Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard.- Prithee say on.
    He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
    Hecuba.
  1. Play. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'
  Ham. 'The mobled queen'?
  Pol. That's good! 'Mobled queen' is good.
  1. Play. 'Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
      With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
      About her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
      A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-  
      Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
      'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
      But if the gods themselves did see her then,
      When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
      In Mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
      The instant burst of clamour that she made
      (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
      Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
      And passion in the gods.'
  Pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
    eyes. Prithee no more!
  Ham. 'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.-
    Good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
    hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
    chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
    bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
  Pol. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
  Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
    desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own  
    honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
    your bounty. Take them in.
  Pol. Come, sirs.
  Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
                 Exeunt Polonius and Players [except the First].
    Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murther of
    Gonzago'?
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
    speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and
    insert in't, could you not?
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.
                                            [Exit First Player.]
    My good friends, I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to
    Elsinore.
  Ros. Good my lord!
  Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye!
                            [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
    Now I am alone.  
    O what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
    Is it not monstrous that this player here,
    But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
    Could force his soul so to his own conceit
    That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
    With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
    For Hecuba!
    What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
    That he should weep for her? What would he do,
    Had he the motive and the cue for passion
    That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
    Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
    Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    The very faculties of eyes and ears.
    Yet I,
    A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
    Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,  
    And can say nothing! No, not for a king,
    Upon whose property and most dear life
    A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?
    Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
    Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
    As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
    'Swounds, I should take it! for it cannot be
    But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this
    I should have fatted all the region kites
    With this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
    Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
    O, vengeance!
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
    That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,
    Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
    Must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
    And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
    A scullion!  
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard
    That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
    Have by the very cunning of the scene
    Been struck so to the soul that presently
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
    For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
    With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players
    Play something like the murther of my father
    Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
    I'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
    I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
    May be a devil; and the devil hath power
    T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
    Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
    As he is very potent with such spirits,
    Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
    More relative than this. The play's the thing
    Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.         Exit.
ACT III. Scene I.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Lords.
  King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
    Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
    Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
    With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
  Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
    But from what cause he will by no means speak.
  Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
    But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
    When we would bring him on to some confession
    Of his true state.
  Queen. Did he receive you well?
  Ros. Most like a gentleman.
  Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.
  Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
    Most free in his reply.
  Queen. Did you assay him  
    To any pastime?
  Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
    We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    To hear of it. They are here about the court,
    And, as I think, they have already order
    This night to play before him.
  Pol. 'Tis most true;
    And he beseech'd me to entreat your Majesties
    To hear and see the matter.
  King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
    To hear him so inclin'd.
    Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
    And drive his purpose on to these delights.
  Ros. We shall, my lord.
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;
    For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
    That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
    Affront Ophelia.  
    Her father and myself (lawful espials)
    Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
    We may of their encounter frankly judge
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
    That thus he suffers for.
  Queen. I shall obey you;
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
    That your good beauties be the happy cause
    Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    To both your honours.
  Oph. Madam, I wish it may.
                                                   [Exit Queen.]
  Pol. Ophelia, walk you here.- Gracious, so please you,
    We will bestow ourselves.- [To Ophelia] Read on this book,
    That show of such an exercise may colour
    Your loneliness.- We are oft to blame in this,
    'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
    And pious action we do sugar o'er  
    The Devil himself.
  King. [aside] O, 'tis too true!
    How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
    The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
    Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
    Than is my deed to my most painted word.
    O heavy burthen!
  Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
                                      Exeunt King and Polonius].
                           Enter Hamlet.
  Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
    Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
    And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
    No more; and by a sleep to say we end
    The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
    That flesh is heir to. 'Tis a consummation  
    Devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
    To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
    For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
    When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
    Must give us pause. There's the respect
    That makes calamity of so long life.
    For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
    Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
    The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
    The insolence of office, and the spurns
    That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
    When he himself might his quietus make
    With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
    To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
    But that the dread of something after death-
    The undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
    No traveller returns- puzzles the will,
    And makes us rather bear those ills we have
    Than fly to others that we know not of?
    Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,  
    And thus the native hue of resolution
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
    And enterprises of great pith and moment
    With this regard their currents turn awry
    And lose the name of action.- Soft you now!
    The fair Ophelia!- Nymph, in thy orisons
    Be all my sins rememb'red.
  Oph. Good my lord,
    How does your honour for this many a day?
  Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
  Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours
    That I have longed long to re-deliver.
    I pray you, now receive them.
  Ham. No, not I!
    I never gave you aught.
  Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
    And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
    As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
    Take these again; for to the noble mind
    Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.  
    There, my lord.
  Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?
  Oph. My lord?
  Ham. Are you fair?
  Oph. What means your lordship?
  Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
    discourse to your beauty.
  Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
  Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
    honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
    translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
    but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
  Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
  Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
    inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
    not.
  Oph. I was the more deceived.
  Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
    sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse
    me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.  
    I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
    beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
    them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I
    do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
    believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your
    father?
  Oph. At home, my lord.
  Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
    nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.
  Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
  Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
    be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
    calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
    needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what
    monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
    Farewell.
  Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
  Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath
    given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
    amble, and you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make your  
    wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't! it hath made
    me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
    married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
    they are. To a nunnery, go.                            Exit.
  Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
    The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
    Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
    The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
    Th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
    Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
    Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
    That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
    Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
    T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
                   Enter King and Polonius.
  King. Love? his affections do not that way tend;  
    Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
    Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
    O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
    And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
    Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
    I have in quick determination
    Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
    For the demand of our neglected tribute.
    Haply the seas, and countries different,
    With variable objects, shall expel
    This something-settled matter in his heart,
    Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
    From fashion of himself. What think you on't?
  Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I believe
    The origin and commencement of his grief
    Sprung from neglected love.- How now, Ophelia?
    You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said.
    We heard it all.- My lord, do as you please;
    But if you hold it fit, after the play
    Let his queen mother all alone entreat him  
    To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
    And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
    Of all their conference. If she find him not,
    To England send him; or confine him where
    Your wisdom best shall think.
  King. It shall be so.
    Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.         Exeunt.
Scene II.
Elsinore. hall in the Castle.
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.
  Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,
    trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
    players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
    not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
    whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
    temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
    soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
    tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
    (for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
    shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
    Termagant. It out-herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.
  Player. I warrant your honour.
  Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
    tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
    this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
    nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,  
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
    'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,
    scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
    form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
    it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
    grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
    o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of Nature's
    journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
    humanity so abominably.
  Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
  Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
    speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
    that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
    spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
    question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
    and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go  
    make you ready.
                                                 Exeunt Players.
            Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
    How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
  Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently.
  Ham. Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonius.] Will you two
    help to hasten them?
  Both. We will, my lord.                       Exeunt they two.
  Ham. What, ho, Horatio!
                      Enter Horatio.
  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
  Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
    As e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
  Hor. O, my dear lord!
  Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter;
    For what advancement may I hope from thee,  
    That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
    To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
    No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
    And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
    Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
    Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
    And could of men distinguish, her election
    Hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
    As one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
    A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
    Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
    Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
    That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
    To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
    That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
    In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
    As I do thee. Something too much of this I
    There is a play to-night before the King.
    One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
    Which I have told thee, of my father's death.  
    I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
    Even with the very comment of thy soul
    Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
    Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
    And my imaginations are as foul
    As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
    And after we will both our judgments join
    In censure of his seeming.
  Hor. Well, my lord.
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
    Sound a flourish. [Enter Trumpets and Kettledrums. Danish
    march. [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
                       carrying torches.
  Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.  
    Get you a place.
  King. How fares our cousin Hamlet?
  Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
    promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.
  King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words are not
    mine.
  Ham. No, nor mine now. [To Polonius] My lord, you play'd once
    i' th' university, you say?
  Pol. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
  Ham. What did you enact?
  Pol. I did enact Julius Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brutus
    kill'd me.
  Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
    the players ready.
  Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
  Pol. [to the King] O, ho! do you mark that?
  Ham. Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
                                  [Sits down at Ophelia's feet.]  
  Oph. No, my lord.
  Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. Do you think I meant country matters?
  Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
  Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
  Oph. What is, my lord?
  Ham. Nothing.
  Oph. You are merry, my lord.
  Ham. Who, I?
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
    For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
    within 's two hours.
  Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
  Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
    suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten
    yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
    half a year. But, by'r Lady, he must build churches then; or else
    shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose  
    epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'
               Hautboys play. The dumb show enters.
    Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing
    him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
    unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
    neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
    him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
    leaves him. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes
    passionate action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes,
    comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
    carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts; she
    seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
    his love.
                                                         Exeunt.
  Oph. What means this, my lord?
  Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.  
  Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
                      Enter Prologue.
  Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;
    they'll tell all.
  Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?
  Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to
    show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
  Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
    Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
      Here stooping to your clemency,
      We beg your hearing patiently.                     [Exit.]
  Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
  Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord.
  Ham. As woman's love.
              Enter [two Players as] King and Queen.  
    King. Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
      Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
      And thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
      About the world have times twelve thirties been,
      Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,
      Unite comutual in most sacred bands.
    Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
      Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
      But woe is me! you are so sick of late,
      So far from cheer and from your former state.
      That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
      Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
      For women's fear and love holds quantity,
      In neither aught, or in extremity.
      Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;
      And as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
      Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
      Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
    King. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
      My operant powers their functions leave to do.
      And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
      Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
      For husband shalt thou-
    Queen. O, confound the rest!
      Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
      When second husband let me be accurst!
      None wed the second but who killed the first.
  Ham. [aside] Wormwood, wormwood!
    Queen. The instances that second marriage move
      Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
      A second time I kill my husband dead
      When second husband kisses me in bed.
    King. I do believe you think what now you speak;
      But what we do determine oft we break.
      Purpose is but the slave to memory,
      Of violent birth, but poor validity;
      Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,  
      But fill unshaken when they mellow be.
      Most necessary 'tis that we forget
      To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
      What to ourselves in passion we propose,
      The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
      The violence of either grief or joy
      Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
      Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
      Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
      This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
      That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
      For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
      Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
      The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
      The poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
      And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
      For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
      And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
      Directly seasons him his enemy.
      But, orderly to end where I begun,  
      Our wills and fates do so contrary run
      That our devices still are overthrown;
      Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
      So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
      But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
    Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
      Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
      To desperation turn my trust and hope,
      An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
      Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
      Meet what I would have well, and it destroy,
      Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
      If, once a widow, ever I be wife!
  Ham. If she should break it now!
    King. 'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
      My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
      The tedious day with sleep.
    Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,  
                                                    [He] sleeps.
      And never come mischance between us twain!
Exit.
  Ham. Madam, how like you this play?
  Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
  Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.
  King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
  Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
    world.
  King. What do you call the play?
  Ham. 'The Mousetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
    image of a murther done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
    his wife, Baptista. You shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of
    work; but what o' that? Your Majesty, and we that have free
    souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
    are unwrung.
                         Enter Lucianus.
  
    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.
  Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
  Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see
    the puppets dallying.
  Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
  Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
  Oph. Still better, and worse.
  Ham. So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
    thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
    bellow for revenge.
    Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
      Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
      Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
      With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
      Thy natural magic and dire property
      On wholesome life usurp immediately.
                                   Pours the poison in his ears.
  Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's Gonzago.  
    The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You
    shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
  Oph. The King rises.
  Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
  Queen. How fares my lord?
  Pol. Give o'er the play.
  King. Give me some light! Away!
  All. Lights, lights, lights!
                              Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio.
  Ham.   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
          The hart ungalled play;
         For some must watch, while some must sleep:
          Thus runs the world away.
    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
    fortunes turn Turk with me-with two Provincial roses on my raz'd
    shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
  Hor. Half a share.
  Ham.   A whole one I!
         For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
           This realm dismantled was  
         Of Jove himself; and now reigns here
           A very, very- pajock.
  Hor. You might have rhym'd.
  Ham. O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
    pound! Didst perceive?
  Hor. Very well, my lord.
  Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
  Hor. I did very well note him.
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
         For if the King like not the comedy,
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
    Come, some music!
                Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
  Ham. Sir, a whole history.
  Guil. The King, sir-
  Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
  Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.  
  Ham. With drink, sir?
  Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
  Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
    the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
    plunge him into far more choler.
  Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
    not so wildly from my affair.
  Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.
  Guil. The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
    hath sent me to you.
  Ham. You are welcome.
  Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
    If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
    your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
    shall be the end of my business.
  Ham. Sir, I cannot.
  Guil. What, my lord?
  Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
    answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
    my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you  
    say-
  Ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
    amazement and admiration.
  Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
    sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
  Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
  Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
    further trade with us?
  Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
  Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
  Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
    bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
    your friend.
  Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.
  Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself
    for your succession in Denmark?
  Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
    musty.
                     Enter the Players with recorders.  
    O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
    you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
    into a toil?
  Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
  Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
  Guil. My lord, I cannot.
  Ham. I pray you.
  Guil. Believe me, I cannot.
  Ham. I do beseech you.
  Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
  Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
    fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
    discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
  Guil. But these cannot I command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
    have not the skill.
  Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
    would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
    pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
    lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,  
    excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
    speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be play'd on than a
    pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
    you cannot play upon me.
                        Enter Polonius.
    God bless you, sir!
  Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
  Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
  Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
  Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
  Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
  Ham. Or like a whale.
  Pol. Very like a whale.
  Ham. Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the
    top of my bent.- I will come by-and-by.
  Pol. I will say so.                                      Exit.
  Ham. 'By-and-by' is easily said.- Leave me, friends.
                                        [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]  
    'Tis now the very witching time of night,
    When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
    Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood
    And do such bitter business as the day
    Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother!
    O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
    The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
    Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
    I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
    My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
    How in my words somever she be shent,
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.
Scene III.
A room in the Castle.
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
    To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
    I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
    And he to England shall along with you.
    The terms of our estate may not endure
    Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
    Out of his lunacies.
  Guil. We will ourselves provide.
    Most holy and religious fear it is
    To keep those many many bodies safe
    That live and feed upon your Majesty.
  Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    To keep itself from noyance; but much more
    That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
    The lives of many. The cesse of majesty
    Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw  
    What's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
    To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
    Are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
    Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
  King. Arm you, I pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
    For we will fetters put upon this fear,
    Which now goes too free-footed.
  Both. We will haste us.
                                               Exeunt Gentlemen.
                   Enter Polonius.
  Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
    Behind the arras I'll convey myself
    To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,  
    Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
    The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
    I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
    And tell you what I know.
  King. Thanks, dear my lord.
                                                Exit [Polonius].
    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
    A brother's murther! Pray can I not,
    Though inclination be as sharp as will.
    My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
    And, like a man to double business bound,
    I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
    And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
    To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
    To be forestalled ere we come to fall,  
    Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;
    My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
    Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murther'?
    That cannot be; since I am still possess'd
    Of those effects for which I did the murther-
    My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
    May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
    In the corrupted currents of this world
    Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
    There is no shuffling; there the action lies
    In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
    To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
    Try what repentance can. What can it not?
    Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
    O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
    O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
    Art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.  
    Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
    All may be well.                                  He kneels.
                         Enter Hamlet.
  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
    And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
    And so am I reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
    A villain kills my father; and for that,
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send
    To heaven.
    Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
    He took my father grossly, full of bread,
    With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
    And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
    But in our circumstance and course of thought,
    'Tis heavy with him; and am I then reveng'd,
    To take him in the purging of his soul,
    When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?  
    No.
    Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
    When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
    Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
    At gaming, swearing, or about some act
    That has no relish of salvation in't-
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
    And that his soul may be as damn'd and black
    As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.              Exit.
  King. [rises] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
    Words without thoughts never to heaven go.             Exit.
Scene IV.
The Queen's closet.
Enter Queen and Polonius.
  Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
    And that your Grace hath screen'd and stood between
    Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
    Pray you be round with him.
  Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!
  Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; I hear him coming.
                              [Polonius hides behind the arras.]
                          Enter Hamlet.
  Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
  Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
  Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
  Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
  Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet?  
  Ham. What's the matter now?
  Queen. Have you forgot me?
  Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
    You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
    And (would it were not so!) you are my mother.
  Queen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
  Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge I
    You go not till I set you up a glass
    Where you may see the inmost part of you.
  Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
    Help, help, ho!
  Pol. [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
  Ham. [draws] How now? a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
            [Makes a pass through the arras and] kills Polonius.
  Pol. [behind] O, I am slain!
  Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
  Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
  Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
  Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.  
  Queen. As kill a king?
  Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
                         [Lifts up the arras and sees Polonius.]
    Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
    I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
    Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
    Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! sit you down
    And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
    If it be made of penetrable stuff;
    If damned custom have not braz'd it so
    That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
  Queen. What have I done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
    In noise so rude against me?
  Ham. Such an act
    That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
    Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
    As false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
    As from the body of contraction plucks  
    The very soul, and sweet religion makes
    A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
    Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,
    Is thought-sick at the act.
  Queen. Ay me, what act,
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
  Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
    The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
    See what a grace was seated on this brow;
    Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
    An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
    A station like the herald Mercury
    New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
    A combination and a form indeed
    Where every god did seem to set his seal
    To give the world assurance of a man.
    This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
    Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?  
    Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes
    You cannot call it love; for at your age
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
    And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
    Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
    Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
    Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
    Nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
    But it reserv'd some quantity of choice
    To serve in such a difference. What devil was't
    That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
    Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
    Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
    Or but a sickly part of one true sense
    Could not so mope.
    O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
    If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
    To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
    And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame  
    When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
    Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
    And reason panders will.
  Queen. O Hamlet, speak no more!
    Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
    And there I see such black and grained spots
    As will not leave their tinct.
  Ham. Nay, but to live
    In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
    Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
    Over the nasty sty!
  Queen. O, speak to me no more!
    These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
    No more, sweet Hamlet!
  Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
    Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
    A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
    That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
    And put it in his pocket!  
  Queen. No more!
                Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.
  Ham. A king of shreds and patches!-
    Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
    You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
  Queen. Alas, he's mad!
  Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
    That, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
    Th' important acting of your dread command?
    O, say!
  Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
    Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
    But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
    O, step between her and her fighting soul
    Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
    Speak to her, Hamlet.
  Ham. How is it with you, lady?
  Queen. Alas, how is't with you,  
    That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
    And with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
    Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
    Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
  Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
    His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
    Would make them capable.- Do not look upon me,
    Lest with this piteous action you convert
    My stern effects. Then what I have to do
    Will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
  Queen. To whom do you speak this?
  Ham. Do you see nothing there?
  Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
  Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
  Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
  Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!  
    My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
    Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
    This bodiless creation ecstasy
    Is very cunning in.
  Ham. Ecstasy?
    My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
    And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
    That I have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
    And I the matter will reword; which madness
    Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
    Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
    That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
    Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
    Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;  
    For in the fatness of these pursy times
    Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
    Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
  Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
    And live the purer with the other half,
    Good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
    Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
    That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
    Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
    That to the use of actions fair and good
    He likewise gives a frock or livery,
    That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
    And that shall lend a kind of easiness
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;
    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
    And either [master] the devil, or throw him out
    With wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
    And when you are desirous to be blest,
    I'll blessing beg of you.- For this same lord,  
    I do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
    To punish me with this, and this with me,
    That I must be their scourge and minister.
    I will bestow him, and will answer well
    The death I gave him. So again, good night.
    I must be cruel, only to be kind;
    Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
    One word more, good lady.
  Queen. What shall I do?
  Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
    Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed;
    Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
    Make you to ravel all this matter out,
    That I essentially am not in madness,
    But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;
    For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
    Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
    Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?  
    No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
    Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
    To try conclusions, in the basket creep
    And break your own neck down.
  Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
    What thou hast said to me.
  Ham. I must to England; you know that?
  Queen. Alack,
    I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
  Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
    Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,
    They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
    And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
    For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
    Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
    But I will delve one yard below their mines
    And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
    When in one line two crafts directly meet.  
    This man shall set me packing.
    I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.-
    Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor
    Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
    Who was in life a foolish peating knave.
    Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
    Good night, mother.
                  [Exit the Queen. Then] Exit Hamlet, tugging in
                                                       Polonius.
ACT IV. Scene I.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
    You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
    Where is your son?
  Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
                          [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!
  King. What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
  Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
    Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
    And in this brainish apprehension kills
    The unseen good old man.
  King. O heavy deed!
    It had been so with us, had we been there.
    His liberty is full of threats to all-
    To you yourself, to us, to every one.  
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
    It will be laid to us, whose providence
    Should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
    This mad young man. But so much was our love
    We would not understand what was most fit,
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    To keep it from divulging, let it feed
    Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
  Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
    Among a mineral of metals base,
    Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
  King. O Gertrude, come away!
    The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
    But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
    We must with all our majesty and skill
    Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!
             Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  
    Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
    Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
    Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
    Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
                          Exeunt [Rosencrantz and Guildenstern].
    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
    And let them know both what we mean to do
    And what's untimely done. [So haply slander-]
    Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
    As level as the cannon to his blank,
    Transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name
    And hit the woundless air.- O, come away!
    My soul is full of discord and dismay.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
Elsinore. A passage in the Castle.
Enter Hamlet.
  Ham. Safely stow'd.
  Gentlemen. (within) Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
  Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.
               Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
  Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
  Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    And bear it to the chapel.
  Ham. Do not believe it.
  Ros. Believe what?
  Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
    demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
    of a king?
  Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
  Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,  
    his authorities. But such officers do the King best service in
    the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
    first mouth'd, to be last Swallowed. When he needs what you have
    glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
    again.
  Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
  Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
  Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
    the King.
  Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.
    The King is a thing-
  Guil. A thing, my lord?
  Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene III.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Enter King.
  King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
    How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
    Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
    He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
    Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
    And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
    But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
    This sudden sending him away must seem
    Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
    By desperate appliance are reliev'd,
    Or not at all.
                    Enter Rosencrantz.
    How now O What hath befall'n?
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
    We cannot get from him.  
  King. But where is he?
  Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
  King. Bring him before us.
  Ros. Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
        Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern [with Attendants].
  King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
  Ham. At supper.
  King. At supper? Where?
  Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain
    convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your
    only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and
    we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar
    is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
    end.
  King. Alas, alas!
  Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
    of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
  King. What dost thou mean by this?  
  Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
    the guts of a beggar.
  King. Where is Polonius?
  Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
    there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
    find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
    the stair, into the lobby.
  King. Go seek him there. [To Attendants.]
  Ham. He will stay till you come.
                                            [Exeunt Attendants.]
  King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,-
    Which we do tender as we dearly grieve
    For that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence
    With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
    The bark is ready and the wind at help,
    Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
    For England.
  Ham. For England?
  King. Ay, Hamlet.
  Ham. Good.  
  King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
  Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England!
    Farewell, dear mother.
  King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.
  Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
    one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
Exit.
  King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
    Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night.
    Away! for everything is seal'd and done
    That else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
                            Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern]
    And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught,-
    As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
    Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
    Pays homage to us,- thou mayst not coldly set
    Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
    By letters congruing to that effect,
    The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;  
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
    And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
    Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.             Exit.
Scene IV.
Near Elsinore.
Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.
  For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
    Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
    Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
    Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
    if that his Majesty would aught with us,
    We shall express our duty in his eye;
    And let him know so.
  Capt. I will do't, my lord.
  For. Go softly on.
                                   Exeunt [all but the Captain].
       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.
  Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
  Capt. They are of Norway, sir.
  Ham. How purpos'd, sir, I pray you?
  Capt. Against some part of Poland.  
  Ham. Who commands them, sir?
  Capt. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
    Or for some frontier?
  Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
    We go to gain a little patch of ground
    That hath in it no profit but the name.
    To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
    Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
    A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
  Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
  Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
  Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
    Will not debate the question of this straw.
    This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
    That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
    Why the man dies.- I humbly thank you, sir.
  Capt. God b' wi' you, sir.                             [Exit.]
  Ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
  Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.  
                                        [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]
    How all occasions do inform against me
    And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
    If his chief good and market of his time
    Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
    Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
    Looking before and after, gave us not
    That capability and godlike reason
    To fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
    Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
    Of thinking too precisely on th' event,-
    A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
    And ever three parts coward,- I do not know
    Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,'
    Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
    To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
    Witness this army of such mass and charge,
    Led by a delicate and tender prince,
    Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,  
    Exposing what is mortal and unsure
    To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
    Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
    Is not to stir without great argument,
    But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
    When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    Excitements of my reason and my blood,
    And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
    The imminent death of twenty thousand men
    That for a fantasy and trick of fame
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
    Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
    Which is not tomb enough and continent
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
    My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!            Exit.
Scene V.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
  Queen. I will not speak with her.
  Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.
    Her mood will needs be pitied.
  Queen. What would she have?
  Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
    There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
    Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
    That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
    Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
    And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
    Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
    Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
  Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
    Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
  Queen. Let her come in.  
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
    [Aside] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
    Each toy seems Prologue to some great amiss.
    So full of artless jealousy is guilt
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
                 Enter Ophelia distracted.
  Oph. Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
  Queen. How now, Ophelia?
  Oph. (sings)
         How should I your true-love know
           From another one?
         By his cockle bat and' staff
           And his sandal shoon.
  Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
  Oph. Say you? Nay, pray You mark.
    (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,  
              He is dead and gone;
            At his head a grass-green turf,
              At his heels a stone.
    O, ho!
  Queen. Nay, but Ophelia-
  Oph. Pray you mark.
    (Sings) White his shroud as the mountain snow-
                    Enter King.
  Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
  Oph. (Sings)
           Larded all with sweet flowers;
         Which bewept to the grave did not go
           With true-love showers.
  King. How do you, pretty lady?
  Oph. Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.  
    Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
    your table!
  King. Conceit upon her father.
  Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
    it means, say you this:
    (Sings) To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
              All in the morning bedtime,
            And I a maid at your window,
              To be your Valentine.
            Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
              And dupp'd the chamber door,
            Let in the maid, that out a maid
              Never departed more.
  King. Pretty Ophelia!
  Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't!
    [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity,  
              Alack, and fie for shame!
            Young men will do't if they come to't
              By Cock, they are to blame.
            Quoth she, 'Before you tumbled me,
              You promis'd me to wed.'
    He answers:
            'So would I 'a' done, by yonder sun,
              An thou hadst not come to my bed.'
  King. How long hath she been thus?
  Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but I cannot
    choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
    My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good
    counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
    ladies. Good night, good night.                         Exit
  King. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
                                                 [Exit Horatio.]  
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
    All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies.
    But in battalions! First, her father slain;
    Next, Your son gone, and he most violent author
    Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
    Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
    For good Polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
    In hugger-mugger to inter him; Poor Ophelia
    Divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
    Without the which we are Pictures or mere beasts;
    Last, and as such containing as all these,
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
    And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
    Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
    Will nothing stick Our person to arraign
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
    Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places  
    Give, me superfluous death.                  A noise within.
  Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
  King. Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
                     Enter a Messenger.
    What is the matter?
  Mess. Save Yourself, my lord:
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
    Than Young Laertes, in a riotous head,
    O'erbears Your offices. The rabble call him lord;
    And, as the world were now but to begin,
    Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
    The ratifiers and props of every word,
    They cry 'Choose we! Laertes shall be king!'
    Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
    'Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!'
                                                 A noise within.
  Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!  
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
  King. The doors are broke.
                    Enter Laertes with others.
  Laer. Where is this king?- Sirs, staid you all without.
  All. No, let's come in!
  Laer. I pray you give me leave.
  All. We will, we will!
  Laer. I thank you. Keep the door.      [Exeunt his Followers.]
    O thou vile king,
    Give me my father!
  Queen. Calmly, good Laertes.
  Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
    Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
    Even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
    Of my true mother.
  King. What is the cause, Laertes,
    That thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
    Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.  
    There's such divinity doth hedge a king
    That treason can but peep to what it would,
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
    Why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, Gertrude.
    Speak, man.
  Laer. Where is my father?
  King. Dead.
  Queen. But not by him!
  King. Let him demand his fill.
  Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil
    Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
    I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd
    Most throughly for my father.
  King. Who shall stay you?
  Laer. My will, not all the world!
    And for my means, I'll husband them so well
    They shall go far with little.  
  King. Good Laertes,
    If you desire to know the certainty
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in Your revenge
    That swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
    Winner and loser?
  Laer. None but his enemies.
  King. Will you know them then?
  Laer. To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    Repast them with my blood.
  King. Why, now You speak
    Like a good child and a true gentleman.
    That I am guiltless of your father's death,
    And am most sensibly in grief for it,
    It shall as level to your judgment pierce
    As day does to your eye.
                              A noise within: 'Let her come in.'
  Laer. How now? What noise is that?
                      Enter Ophelia.  
    O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
    Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
    By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
    Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    O heavens! is't possible a young maid's wits
    Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
    It sends some precious instance of itself
    After the thing it loves.
  Oph. (sings)
         They bore him barefac'd on the bier
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
         And in his grave rain'd many a tear.
    Fare you well, my dove!
  Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
    It could not move thus.  
  Oph. You must sing 'A-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.' O,
    how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
    master's daughter.
  Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
  Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
    remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
  Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
  Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
    and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' Sundays.
    O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I
    would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
    died. They say he made a good end.
    [Sings] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
  Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
    She turns to favour and to prettiness.
  Oph. (sings)
         And will he not come again?
         And will he not come again?
           No, no, he is dead;  
           Go to thy deathbed;
         He never will come again.
         His beard was as white as snow,
         All flaxen was his poll.
           He is gone, he is gone,
           And we cast away moan.
         God 'a'mercy on his soul!
    And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b' wi', you.
Exit.
  Laer. Do you see this, O God?
  King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
    Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
    Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
    And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
    If by direct or by collateral hand
    They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
    Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
    To you in satisfaction; but if not,  
    Be you content to lend your patience to us,
    And we shall jointly labour with your soul
    To give it due content.
  Laer. Let this be so.
    His means of death, his obscure funeral-
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
    No noble rite nor formal ostentation,-
    Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
    That I must call't in question.
  King. So you shall;
    And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
    I pray you go with me.
                                                          Exeunt
Scene VI.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
Enter Horatio with an Attendant.
  Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
  Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
  Hor. Let them come in.
                                               [Exit Attendant.]
    I do not know from what part of the world
    I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
                          Enter Sailors.
  Sailor. God bless you, sir.
  Hor. Let him bless thee too.
  Sailor. 'A shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
    sir,- it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England- if
    your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.
  Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
    this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have
    letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of  
    very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
    slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I
    boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so I
    alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
    of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for
    them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou
    to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
    light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
    thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course
    for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.
                            'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'
    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    And do't the speedier that you may direct me
    To him from whom you brought them.                   Exeunt.
Scene VII.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.
Enter King and Laertes.
  King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
    And You must put me in your heart for friend,
    Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
    That he which hath your noble father slain
    Pursued my life.
  Laer. It well appears. But tell me
    Why you proceeded not against these feats
    So crimeful and so capital in nature,
    As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
    You mainly were stirr'd up.
  King. O, for two special reasons,
    Which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
    But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,-
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-
    She's so conjunctive to my life and soul
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,  
    I could not but by her. The other motive
    Why to a public count I might not go
    Is the great love the general gender bear him,
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
    Convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
    Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
    Would have reverted to my bow again,
    And not where I had aim'd them.
  Laer. And so have I a noble father lost;
    A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
    Stood challenger on mount of all the age
    For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
  King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
    That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
    That we can let our beard be shook with danger,
    And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
    I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
    And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine-  
                 Enter a Messenger with letters.
    How now? What news?
  Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
    This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.
  King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
  Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
    They were given me by Claudio; he receiv'd them
    Of him that brought them.
  King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
    Leave us.
                                                 Exit Messenger.
    [Reads]'High and Mighty,-You shall know I am set naked on your
    kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes;
    when I shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
    occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
                                                     'HAMLET.'
    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
    Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?  
  Laer. Know you the hand?
  King. 'Tis Hamlet's character. 'Naked!'
    And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'
    Can you advise me?
  Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!
    It warms the very sickness in my heart
    That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
    'Thus didest thou.'
  King. If it be so, Laertes
    (As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
    Will you be rul'd by me?
  Laer. Ay my lord,
    So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
  King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means
    No more to undertake it, I will work him
    To exploit now ripe in my device,
    Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
    And for his death no wind
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practice  
    And call it accident.
  Laer. My lord, I will be rul'd;
    The rather, if you could devise it so
    That I might be the organ.
  King. It falls right.
    You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
    And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
    Wherein they say you shine, Your sun of parts
    Did not together pluck such envy from him
    As did that one; and that, in my regard,
    Of the unworthiest siege.
  Laer. What part is that, my lord?
  King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
    Yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
    The light and careless livery that it wears
    Thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
    Importing health and graveness. Two months since
    Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
    I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,
    And they can well on horseback; but this gallant  
    Had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,
    And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
    As had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd
    With the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
    That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
    Come short of what he did.
  Laer. A Norman was't?
  King. A Norman.
  Laer. Upon my life, Lamound.
  King. The very same.
  Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
    And gem of all the nation.
  King. He made confession of you;
    And gave you such a masterly report
    For art and exercise in your defence,
    And for your rapier most especially,
    That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
    If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
    He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
    If you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his  
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
    That he could nothing do but wish and beg
    Your sudden coming o'er to play with you.
    Now, out of this-
  Laer. What out of this, my lord?
  King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
    Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
    A face without a heart,'
  Laer. Why ask you this?
  King. Not that I think you did not love your father;
    But that I know love is begun by time,
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
    There lives within the very flame of love
    A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
    And nothing is at a like goodness still;
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
    Dies in his own too-much. That we would do,
    We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
    And hath abatements and delays as many  
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
    That hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
    Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake
    To show yourself your father's son in deed
    More than in words?
  Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!
  King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
    Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
    Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
    Will return'd shall know you are come home.
    We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
    And set a double varnish on the fame
    The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
    And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
    Most generous, and free from all contriving,
    Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
    Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
    A sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
    Requite him for your father.  
  Laer. I will do't!
    And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
    I bought an unction of a mountebank,
    So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
    Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
    Collected from all simples that have virtue
    Under the moon, can save the thing from death
    This is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
    It may be death.
  King. Let's further think of this,
    Weigh what convenience both of time and means
    May fit us to our shape. If this should fall,
    And that our drift look through our bad performance.
    'Twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
    Should have a back or second, that might hold
    If this did blast in proof. Soft! let me see.
    We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
    I ha't!
    When in your motion you are hot and dry-  
    As make your bouts more violent to that end-
    And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
    If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
    Our purpose may hold there.- But stay, what noise,
                           Enter Queen.
    How now, sweet queen?
  Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
    So fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.
  Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
  Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
    There with fantastic garlands did she come
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
    There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,  
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
    Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    Or like a creature native and indued
    Unto that element; but long it could not be
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
    To muddy death.
  Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
  Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
  Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
    And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet
    It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
    Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
    The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.
    I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze
    But that this folly douts it.                          Exit.
  King. Let's follow, Gertrude.  
    How much I had to do to calm his rage I
    Now fear I this will give it start again;
    Therefore let's follow.
                                                         Exeunt.
ACT V. Scene I.
Elsinore. A churchyard.
Enter two Clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].
  Clown. Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she wilfully
    seeks her own salvation?
  Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
    The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian burial.
  Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own
    defence?
  Other. Why, 'tis found so.
  Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
    the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
    act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
    argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
  Other. Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver!
  Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
    man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
    him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
    guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.  
  Other. But is this law?
  Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
  Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
    gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' Christian burial.
  Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
    should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
    more than their even-Christen. Come, my spade! There is no
    ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
    hold up Adam's profession.
  Other. Was he a gentleman?
  Clown. 'A was the first that ever bore arms.
  Other. Why, he had none.
  Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture?
    The Scripture says Adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll
    put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
    purpose, confess thyself-
  Other. Go to!
  Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
    shipwright, or the carpenter?
  Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand  
    tenants.
  Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
    But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
    thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
    church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
  Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
    carpenter?
  Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
  Other. Marry, now I can tell!
  Clown. To't.
  Other. Mass, I cannot tell.
                 Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.
  Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
    not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
    question next, say 'a grave-maker.' The houses he makes lasts
    till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
    liquor.
                                            [Exit Second Clown.]  
                       [Clown digs and] sings.
       In youth when I did love, did love,
         Methought it was very sweet;
       To contract- O- the time for- a- my behove,
         O, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
  Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
    grave-making?
  Hor. Custom hath made it in him a Property of easiness.
  Ham. 'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
    sense.
  Clown. (sings)
         But age with his stealing steps
           Hath clawed me in his clutch,
         And hath shipped me intil the land,
           As if I had never been such.
                                            [Throws up a skull.]
  
  Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
    knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
    did the first murther! This might be the pate of a Politician,
    which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent God,
    might it not?
  Hor. It might, my lord.
  Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!
    How dost thou, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that
    prais'd my Lord Such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
    it not?
  Hor. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd
    about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
    and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
    breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
    on't.
  Clown. (Sings)
         A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
           For and a shrouding sheet;
         O, a Pit of clay for to be made  
           For such a guest is meet.
                                      Throws up [another skull].
  Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
    Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
    and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
    him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
    of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
    great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
    fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
    his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
    of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
    scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
    more, ha?
  Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
  Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
  Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.
  Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I  
    will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
  Clown. Mine, sir.
    [Sings] O, a pit of clay for to be made
              For such a guest is meet.
  Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.
  Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
    For my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
  Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'Tis for
    the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
  Clown. 'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
  Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?
  Clown. For no man, sir.
  Ham. What woman then?
  Clown. For none neither.
  Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
  Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
  Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
    equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years
    I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe  
    of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
    his kibe.- How long hast thou been a grave-maker?
  Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that our
    last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
  Ham. How long is that since?
  Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
    very day that young Hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
    into England.
  Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?
  Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'A shall recover his wits there;
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
  Ham. Why?
  Clown. 'Twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
    he.
  Ham. How came he mad?
  Clown. Very strangely, they say.
  Ham. How strangely?
  Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
  Ham. Upon what ground?
  Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy  
    thirty years.
  Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
  Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
    pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I
    will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
    you nine year.
  Ham. Why he more than another?
  Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
    keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
    your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien
    you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
  Ham. Whose was it?
  Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?
  Ham. Nay, I know not.
  Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'A pour'd a flagon of
    Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's
    skull, the King's jester.
  Ham. This?
  Clown. E'en that.
  Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skull.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,  
    Horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
    hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred
    in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those
    lips that I have kiss'd I know not how oft. Where be your gibes
    now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that
    were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
    own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
    chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
    favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio,
    tell me one thing.
  Hor. What's that, my lord?
  Ham. Dost thou think Alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
  Hor. E'en so.
  Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
                                          [Puts down the skull.]
  Hor. E'en so, my lord.
  Ham. To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not
    imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it
    stopping a bunghole?
  Hor. 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.  
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
    enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died,
    Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
    earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
    was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
    Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
    Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
    O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
    Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
    But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-
    Enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], King,
             Queen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.]
    The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
    And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
    The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
    Fordo it own life. 'Twas of some estate.
    Couch we awhile, and mark.
                                         [Retires with Horatio.]  
  Laer. What ceremony else?
  Ham. That is Laertes,
    A very noble youth. Mark.
  Laer. What ceremony else?
  Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
    As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;
    And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
    She should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd
    Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
    Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
    Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
    Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
    Of bell and burial.
  Laer. Must there no more be done?
  Priest. No more be done.
    We should profane the service of the dead
    To sing a requiem and such rest to her
    As to peace-parted souls.
  Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
    And from her fair and unpolluted flesh  
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
    A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
    When thou liest howling.
  Ham. What, the fair Ophelia?
  Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
                                             [Scatters flowers.]
    I hop'd thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
    I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    And not have strew'd thy grave.
  Laer. O, treble woe
    Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
    Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
    Depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
    Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
                                             Leaps in the grave.
    Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
    Till of this flat a mountain you have made
    T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
    Of blue Olympus.
  Ham. [comes forward] What is he whose grief  
    Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
    Conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
    Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
    Hamlet the Dane.                    [Leaps in after Laertes.
  Laer. The devil take thy soul!
                                            [Grapples with him].
  Ham. Thou pray'st not well.
    I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
    For, though I am not splenitive and rash,
    Yet have I in me something dangerous,
    Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
  King. Pluck thein asunder.
  Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet!
  All. Gentlemen!
  Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
             [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the
                                                         grave.]
  Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
    Until my eyelids will no longer wag.
  Queen. O my son, what theme?  
  Ham. I lov'd Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
    Could not (with all their quantity of love)
    Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
  King. O, he is mad, Laertes.
  Queen. For love of God, forbear him!
  Ham. 'Swounds, show me what thou't do.
    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
    Woo't drink up esill? eat a crocodile?
    I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
    To outface me with leaping in her grave?
    Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
    And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
    Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
    I'll rant as well as thou.
  Queen. This is mere madness;
    And thus a while the fit will work on him.
    Anon, as patient as the female dove
    When that her golden couplets are disclos'd,  
    His silence will sit drooping.
  Ham. Hear you, sir!
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
    I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.
    Let Hercules himself do what he may,
    The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Exit.
  King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
                                                   Exit Horatio.
    [To Laertes] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
    We'll put the matter to the present push.-
    Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.-
    This grave shall have a living monument.
    An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
    Till then in patience our proceeding be.
                                                         Exeunt.
Scene II.
Elsinore. A hall in the Castle.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.
  Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
    You do remember all the circumstance?
  Hor. Remember it, my lord!
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
    Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
    And prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,
    Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
    When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us
    There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
    Rough-hew them how we will-
  Hor. That is most certain.
  Ham. Up from my cabin,
    My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
    Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire,
    Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
    To mine own room again; making so bold  
    (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal
    Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio
    (O royal knavery!), an exact command,
    Larded with many several sorts of reasons,
    Importing Denmark's health, and England's too,
    With, hoo! such bugs and goblins in my life-
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe,
    My head should be struck off.
  Hor. Is't possible?
  Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
    But wilt thou bear me how I did proceed?
  Hor. I beseech you.
  Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,
    Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
    They had begun the play. I sat me down;
    Devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
    How to forget that learning; but, sir, now  
    It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
    Th' effect of what I wrote?
  Hor. Ay, good my lord.
  Ham. An earnest conjuration from the King,
    As England was his faithful tributary,
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,
    As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
    And many such-like as's of great charge,
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    Without debatement further, more or less,
    He should the bearers put to sudden death,
    Not shriving time allow'd.
  Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
    I had my father's signet in my purse,
    which was the model of that Danish seal;
    Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
    Subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
    The changeling never known. Now, the next day  
    Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
    Thou know'st already.
  Hor. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
  Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat
    Does by their own insinuation grow.
    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
    Between the pass and fell incensed points
    Of mighty opposites.
  Hor. Why, what a king is this!
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
    He that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
    Popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
    Thrown out his angle for my Proper life,
    And with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
    To quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
    To let this canker of our nature come
    In further evil?
  Hor. It must be shortly known to him from England
    What is the issue of the business there.  
  Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
    And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.'
    But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
    That to Laertes I forgot myself,
    For by the image of my cause I see
    The portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.
    But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
    Into a tow'ring passion.
  Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
                 Enter young Osric, a courtier.
  Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
  Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio] Dost know this
    waterfly?
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.
  Ham. [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
    vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be
    lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis
    a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.  
  Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
    a thing to you from his Majesty.
  Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
    bonnet to his right use. 'Tis for the head.
  Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
  Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
  Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
  Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
  Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
    tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
    he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
  Ham. I beseech you remember.
                           [Hamlet moves him to put on his hat.]
  Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
    newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
    full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
    what part a gentleman would see.
  Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I  
    know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
    memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
    But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
    article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
    true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
    would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
  Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
  Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
    rawer breath
  Osr. Sir?
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another
    tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
  Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
  Osr. Of Laertes?
  Hor. [aside] His purse is empty already. All's golden words are
    spent.
  Ham. Of him, sir.
  Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
  Ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
    much approve me. Well, sir?  
  Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
  Ham. I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in
    excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
    by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
  Ham. What's his weapon?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger.
  Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
    very liberal conceit.
  Ham. What call you the carriages?
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent
    ere you had done.
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
  Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
    carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.  
    But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their
    assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French
    bet against the Danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
  Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
    yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
    laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
    if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
  Ham. How if I answer no?
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
  Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,
    it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
    brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,
    I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my
    shame and the odd hits.
  Osr. Shall I redeliver you e'en so?
  Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
  Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
  Ham. Yours, yours. [Exit Osric.] He does well to commend it
    himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
  Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.  
  Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,
    and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
    on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
    a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
    through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
    them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
                            Enter a Lord.
  Lord. My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who
    brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
    know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
    take longer time.
  Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure.
    If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
    I be so able as now.
  Lord. The King and Queen and all are coming down.
  Ham. In happy time.
  Lord. The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
    Laertes before you fall to play.  
  Ham. She well instructs me.
                                                    [Exit Lord.]
  Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
  Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into France I have been in
    continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
    think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.
  Hor. Nay, good my lord -
  Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
    would perhaps trouble a woman.
  Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
    repair hither and say you are not fit.
  Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
    the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
    not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
    the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
    what is't to leave betimes? Let be.
    Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other
              Attendants with foils and gauntlets.
               A table and flagons of wine on it.  
  King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
                    [The King puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
  Ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
    But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
    This presence knows,
    And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd
    With sore distraction. What I have done
    That might your nature, honour, and exception
    Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
    Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet.
    If Hamlet from himself be taken away,
    And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
    Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
    His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
    Sir, in this audience,
    Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil
    Free me so far in your most generous thoughts  
    That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
    And hurt my brother.
  Laer. I am satisfied in nature,
    Whose motive in this case should stir me most
    To my revenge. But in my terms of honour
    I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
    Till by some elder masters of known honour
    I have a voice and precedent of peace
    To keep my name ungor'd. But till that time
    I do receive your offer'd love like love,
    And will not wrong it.
  Ham. I embrace it freely,
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
    Give us the foils. Come on.
  Laer. Come, one for me.
  Ham. I'll be your foil, Laertes. In mine ignorance
    Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
    Stick fiery off indeed.
  Laer. You mock me, sir.
  Ham. No, by this bad.  
  King. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
    You know the wager?
  Ham. Very well, my lord.
    Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
  King. I do not fear it, I have seen you both;
    But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
  Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
  Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
                                                Prepare to play.
  Osr. Ay, my good lord.
  King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
    Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
    The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
    And in the cup an union shall he throw
    Richer than that which four successive kings
    In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
    And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
    The trumpet to the cannoneer without,  
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
    'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin.
    And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
  Ham. Come on, sir.
  Laer. Come, my lord.                                They play.
  Ham. One.
  Laer. No.
  Ham. Judgment!
  Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
  Laer. Well, again!
  King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
    Here's to thy health.
               [Drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].
    Give him the cup.
  Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.
    Come. (They play.) Another hit. What say you?
  Laer. A touch, a touch; I do confess't.
  King. Our son shall win.
  Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.  
    The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
  Ham. Good madam!
  King. Gertrude, do not drink.
  Queen. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.          Drinks.
  King. [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
  Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
  Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
  Laer. My lord, I'll hit him now.
  King. I do not think't.
  Laer. [aside] And yet it is almost against my conscience.
  Ham. Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally.
    pray You Pass with your best violence;
    I am afeard You make a wanton of me.
  Laer. Say you so? Come on.                               Play.
  Osr. Nothing neither way.
  Laer. Have at you now!
                [Laertes wounds Hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
                    change rapiers, [and Hamlet wounds Laertes].
  King. Part them! They are incens'd.
  Ham. Nay come! again!                         The Queen falls.  
  Osr. Look to the Queen there, ho!
  Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
  Osr. How is't, Laertes?
  Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
    I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
  Ham. How does the Queen?
  King. She sounds to see them bleed.
  Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]
  Ham. O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd.
    Treachery! Seek it out.
                                                [Laertes falls.]
  Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
    No medicine in the world can do thee good.
    In thee there is not half an hour of life.
    The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
    Unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice
    Hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
    Never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
    I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.  
  Ham. The point envenom'd too?
    Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hurts the King.
  All. Treason! treason!
  King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
  Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
    Drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
    Follow my mother.                                 King dies.
  Laer. He is justly serv'd.
    It is a poison temper'd by himself.
    Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
    Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
    Nor thine on me!                                       Dies.
  Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
    I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
    You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    That are but mutes or audience to this act,
    Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
    Is strict in his arrest) O, I could tell you-
    But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;
    Thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright  
    To the unsatisfied.
  Hor. Never believe it.
    I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
    Here's yet some liquor left.
  Ham. As th'art a man,
    Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't.
    O good Horatio, what a wounded name
    (Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!
    If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
    Absent thee from felicity awhile,
    And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
    To tell my story.         [March afar off, and shot within.]
    What warlike noise is this?
  Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
    To the ambassadors of England gives
    This warlike volley.
  Ham. O, I die, Horatio!
    The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
    I cannot live to hear the news from England,
    But I do prophesy th' election lights  
    On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
    So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
    Which have solicited- the rest is silence.             Dies.
  Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
                                                 [March within.]
    Why does the drum come hither?
    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,
                  Colours, and Attendants.
  Fort. Where is this sight?
  Hor. What is it you will see?
    If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
  Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
    What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
    That thou so many princes at a shot
    So bloodily hast struck.
  Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
    And our affairs from England come too late.  
    The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
    To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
    That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
    Where should We have our thanks?
  Hor. Not from his mouth,
    Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
    He never gave commandment for their death.
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
    Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
    High on a stage be placed to the view;
    And let me speak to the yet unknowing world
    How these things came about. So shall You hear
    Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
    Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
    Of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
    Truly deliver.
  Fort. Let us haste to hear it,  
    And call the noblest to the audience.
    For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
    I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
    Which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
  Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
    But let this same be presently perform'd,
    Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
    On plots and errors happen.
  Fort. Let four captains
    Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
    For he was likely, had he been put on,
    To have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
    The soldiers' music and the rites of war
    Speak loudly for him.
    Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
    Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
            Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
                                                   are shot off.  
THE END